
 AP880911-0016 
AP-NR-09-11-88 0423EDT
r i BC-HurricaneGilbert     09-11 0339
BC-Hurricane Gilbert,0348
Hurricane Gilbert Heads Toward Dominican Coast
By RUDDY GONZALEZ
Associated Press Writer
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert swept
toward the Dominican Republic Sunday, and the Civil Defense alerted
its heavily populated south coast to prepare for high winds, heavy
rains and high seas.
   The storm was approaching from the southeast with sustained
winds of 75 mph gusting to 92 mph.
   ``There is no need for alarm,'' Civil Defense Director Eugenio
Cabral said in a television alert shortly before midnight Saturday.
   Cabral said residents of the province of Barahona should closely
follow Gilbert's movement. An estimated 100,000 people live in the
province, including 70,000 in the city of Barahona, about 125 miles
west of Santo Domingo.
   Tropical Storm Gilbert formed in the eastern Caribbean and
strengthened into a hurricane Saturday night. The National
Hurricane Center in Miami reported its position at 2 a.m. Sunday at
latitude 16.1 north, longitude 67.5 west, about 140 miles south of
Ponce, Puerto Rico, and 200 miles southeast of Santo Domingo.
   The National Weather Service in San Juan, Puerto Rico, said
Gilbert was moving westward at 15 mph with a ``broad area of
cloudiness and heavy weather'' rotating around the center of the
storm.
   The weather service issued a flash flood watch for Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands until at least 6 p.m. Sunday.
   Strong winds associated with the Gilbert brought coastal
flooding, strong southeast winds and up to 12 feet feet to Puerto
Rico's south coast. There were no reports of casualties.
   San Juan, on the north coast, had heavy rains and gusts
Saturday, but they subsided during the night.
   On Saturday, Hurricane Florence was downgraded to a tropical
storm and its remnants pushed inland from the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Residents returned home, happy to find little damage from 80 mph
winds and sheets of rain.
   Florence, the sixth named storm of the 1988 Atlantic storm
season, was the second hurricane. The first, Debby, reached minimal
hurricane strength briefly before hitting the Mexican coast last
month.



 AP880912-0095 
AP-NR-09-12-88 1300EDT
u i PM-HurricaneGilbert 5thLd-Writethru a0539 09-12 0829
PM-Hurricane Gilbert, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0539,0851
Gilbert Reaches Jamaican Capital With 110 Mph Winds
Eds: LEADS 10 grafs with hurricane reaching Kingston with 110 mph
winds, details, quotes. Picks up graf 3 pvs, `Most Jamaicans ...'
DELETES graf 12 pvs, `Storm warnings ...' as outdated.
By LLOYD WILLIAMS
Associated Press Writer
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert, packing 110 mph
winds and torrential rain, moved over this capital city today after
skirting Puerto Rico, Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
   There were no immediate reports of casualties. Telephone
communications were affected.
   ``Right now it's actually moving over Jamaica,'' said Bob
Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami. ``We've
already had reports of 110 mph winds on the eastern tip.
   ``It looks like the eye is going to move lengthwise across that
island, and they're going to bear the full brunt of this powerful
hurricane,'' Sheets said.
   Forecasters say Gilbert was expected to lash Jamaica throughout
the day and was on track to later strike the Cayman Islands, a
small British dependency northwest of Jamaica.
   Meanwhile, Havana Radio reported today that 25,000 people were
evacuated from Guantanamo Province on Cuba's southeastern coast as
strong winds fanning out from Gilbert began brushing the island.
   All Jamaica-bound flights were canceled at Miami International
Airport, while flights from Grand Cayman, the main island of the
three-island chain, arrived packed with frightened travelers.
   ``People were running around in the main lobby of our hotel (on
Grand Cayman) like chickens with their heads cut off,'' said one
vacationer who was returning home to California through Miami.
   Hurricane warnings were posted for the Cayman Islands, Cuba and
Haiti. Warnings were discontinued for the Dominican Republic.
   ``All interests in the Western Caribbean should continue to
monitor the progress of this dangerous hurricane,'' the service
said, adding, ``Little change in strength is expected for the next
several hours as the hurricane moves westward over Jamaica.''
   The Associated Press' Caribbean headquarters in San Juan, Puerto
Rico, was unable to get phone calls through to Kingston, where high
winds and heavy rain preceding the storm drenched the capital
overnight, toppling trees, causing local flooding and littering
streets with branches.
   Most Jamaicans stayed home, boarding up windows in preparation
for the hurricane. Some companies broadcast appeals for technicians
and electricians to report to work.
   The weather bureau predicted Gilbert's center, 140 miles
southeast of Kingston before dawn, would pass south of Kingston and
hit the southern parish of Clarendon.
   Flash flood warnings were issued for the parishes of Portland on
the northeast and St. Mary on the north. The north coast tourist
region from Montego Bay on the west and Ocho Rios on the east, far
from the southern impact zone and separated by mountains, was
expected only to receive heavy rain.
   Officials urged residents in the higher risk areas along the
south coast to seek higher ground.
   ``It's certainly one of the larger systems we've seen in the
Caribbean for a long time,'' said Hal Gerrish, forecaster at the
National Hurricane Center.
   Forecasters at the center said the eye of Gilbert was 140 miles
southeast of Kingston at dawn today. Maximum sustained winds were
near 110 mph, with tropical-storm force winds extending up to 250
miles to the north and 100 miles to the south.
   Prime Minister Edward Seaga of Jamaica alerted all government
agencies, saying Sunday night: ``Hurricane Gilbert appears to be a
real threat and everyone should follow the instructions and
hurricane precautions issued by the Office of Disaster Preparedness
in order to minimize the danger.''
   Forecasters said the hurricane had been gaining strength as it
passed over the ocean after it dumped 5 to 10 inches of rain on the
Dominican Republic and Haiti, which share the island of Hispaniola.
   ``We should know within about 72 hours whether it's going to be
a major threat to the United States,'' said Martin Nelson, another
meteorologist at the center. ``It's moving at about 17 mph to the
west and normally hurricanes take a northward turn after they pass
central Cuba.''
   Cuba's official Prensa Latina news agency said a state of alert
was declared at midday in the Cuban provinces of Guantanamo,
Holguin, Santiago de Cuba and Granma.
   In the report from Havana received in Mexico City, Prensa Latina
said civil defense officials were broadcasting bulletins on
national radio and television recommending emergency measures and
providing information on the storm.
   Heavy rain and stiff winds downed power lines and caused
flooding in the Dominican Republic on Sunday night as the
hurricane's center passed just south of the Barahona peninsula,
then less than 100 miles from neighboring Haiti.
   The storm ripped the roofs off houses and flooded coastal areas
of southwestern Puerto Rico after reaching hurricane strength off
the island's southeast Saturday night.
   Flights were canceled Sunday in the Dominican Republic, where
civil defense director Eugenio Cabral reported some flooding in
parts of the capital of Santo Domingo and power outages there and
in other southern areas.



 AP880912-0137 
AP-NR-09-12-88 1555EDT
u i AM-HurricaneGilbert Bjt   09-12 0681
AM-Hurricane Gilbert, Bjt,0702
Hurricane Hits Jamaica With 115 mph Winds; Communications
Disrupted
By LLOYD WILLIAMS
Associated Press Writer
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert slammed into Kingston
on Monday with torrential rains and 115 mph winds that ripped roofs
off homes and buildings, uprooted trees and downed power lines.
   No serious injuries were immediately reported in the city of
750,000 people, which was hit by the full force of the hurricane
around noon.
   For half an hour, the hurricane lashed the city, tearing
branches from trees, blowing down fences and whipping paper through
the air.
   The National Weather Service reported heavy damage to Kingston's
airport and aircraft parked on its fields.
   The first shock let up as the eye of the storm moved across the
city. Skies brightened, the winds died down and people waited for
an hour before the second blow of the hurricane arrived.
   All Jamaica-bound flights were canceled at Miami International
Airport.
   Flights from the Cayman Islands, reportedly next in the path of
the hurricane, arrived in Miami packed with travelers cutting short
their vacations. ``People were running around in the main lobby of
our hotel (on Grand Cayman Island) like chickens with their heads
cut off,'' said one man.
   A National Weather Service report said the hurricane was moving
west at 17 mph with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph. It said
Jamaica would receive up to 10 inches of rain that would cause
flash floods and mud slides.
   ``Right now it's actually moving over Jamaica,'' said Bob
Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami.
   ``It looks like the eye is going to move lengthwise across that
island, and they're going to bear the full brunt of this powerful
hurricane,'' he said.
   Gilbert reached Jamaica after skirting southern Puerto Rico,
Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Hurricane warnings were issued
Monday for the south coast of Cuba east of Camaguey, the Cayman
Islands, and Haiti, while warnings were discontinued for the
Dominican Republic.
   High winds and heavy rain preceding the storm drenched Kingston
overnight, toppling trees, causing local flooding and littering
streets with branches.
   Most of Jamaica's 2.3 million people stayed home, boarding up
windows in preparation for the hurricane.
   The popular north coast resort area, on the other side of the
mountains, was expected to receive heavy rain but not as much
damage from the hurricane as the south coast, where officials urged
residents to seek higher ground.
   Havana Radio, meanwhile, reported Monday that 25,000 people were
evacuated from coastal areas in Guantanamo Province on the nation's
southeastern coast as Gilbert's winds and rain began to brush the
island.
   In Washington, the Navy reported its bases at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and Roosevelt Roads, Puerto Rico, had taken various
precautionary steps but appeared to be safe from the brunt of the
hurricane.
   Lt. Ken Ross, a spokesman, said the Navy station at Guantanamo
reported that as of 2:30 p.m. EDT, the brunt of the storm appeared
to be passing southeastern Cuba. ``They have reported maximum winds
of 25 knots and gusts up to 50 knots,'' said Ross. ``But there are
no reports of injuries or damage.''
   The spokesman said earlier in the day, Guantanamo had moved to
``Condition Two,'' meaning electrical power usage was cut back to
only essential uses and ``all non-essential personnel sent to their
barracks.''
   The storm also skirted Puerto Rico without causing any damage to
military facilities, Ross said.
   Sheets said Gilbert was expected next to sweep over the Cayman
Islands, on its westward track, and in two to three days veer
northwest into the southern Gulf of Mexico. Residents of the
neighboring Caymans, a British dependency to the northwest, were
urged to ``rush all preparatory actions.''
   The National Weather Service warned that the Caymans could
expect high waters and large waves ``which may undermine buildings
along the beaches.''
   ``All interests in the Western Caribbean should continue to
monitor the progress of this dangerous hurricane,'' the service
advised.
   Forecaster Hal Gerrish on Sunday described Gilbert ``certainly
one of the larger systems we've seen in the Caribbean for a long
time.''



 AP880915-0003 
AP-NR-09-15-88 0004EDT
u i AM-HurricaneGilbert 4thLd-Writethru   09-15 1136
AM-Hurricane Gilbert, 4th Ld - Writethru,a0897,1167
Storms Batter Yucatan; Thousands Flee
Eds: SUBS 6th graf pvs, `Army officials...' with two grafs to
UPDATE with total known evacuations on Yucatan; PICKS up 7th pvs:
The eye...; SUBS grafs 17-21 `At 9 p.m EDT ...a Category 4.' with
seven grafs to UPDATE with new wind speeds, distances, hurricane
forming double eye; PICKS up 22nd graf pvs: Only two...
LaserGraphic NY36, LaserMap WX14
By CHRIS ANGELO
Associated Press Writer
CANCUN, Mexico (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert, one of the strongest
storms ever, slammed into the Yucatan Peninsula Wednesday and
leveled thatched homes, tore off roofs, uprooted trees and cut off
the Caribbean resorts of Cancun and Cozumel.
   Looters roamed the streets of Cancun, stealing from stores whose
windows were blown away. Huge waves battered the beach resorts and
thousands were evacuated. Despite the intensity of the onslaught
and the ensuing heavy flooding, officials reported only two minor
injuries.
   The storm killed 19 people in Jamaica and five in the Dominican
Republic before moving west to Mexico. Prime Minister Edward Seaga
of Jamaica said Wednesday the storm destroyed an estimated 100,000
of Jamaica's 500,000 homes when it throttled the island Monday.
   The Jamaican Embassy reported earlier that 500,000 of the
nation's 2.3 million people were homeless.
   In Cancun, amateur radio operators said an oil tanker from the
fleet of the government oil monopoly Pemex, the Lazaro Cardenas,
had run aground on the beach in the Cancun hotel zone. Pemex
officials however said all their vessels were secure.
   Army officials in Mexico City said about 35,000 people were
evacuated from Cancun, but Cancun Mayor Jose Sanchez Zapata said
about 11,000 fled.
   More than 120,000 people on the northeast Yucatan coast were
evacuated, the Yucatan state government said.
   The eye of the storm passed over Cozumel and Cancun with howling
winds clocked at 160 mph at about 8 a.m. EDT. The winds bent and
toppled utility poles and uprooted slum dwellings.
   Ham radio operators around Cancun said Gilbert knocked down a
radio and television communications tower, uprooted trees and blew
the roofs off buildings.
   Floods prevented officials from reaching the hotel zone in
Cancun and there were no relief efforts under way by late
Wednesday. Shelters had little or no food, water or blankets and
power was out.
   ``We can't do it yet. The wind would blow them away,'' said an
army official at city hall who declined to give his name.
   Bands of 25-30 youths roamed the streets of Cancun Wednesday,
looting stores with shattered windows, said Alfredo Moro Sanchez,
investigative coordinator of the Quintana Roo state judicial police.
   He said he asked for army troops to halt the looting but none
had arrived by late Wednesday.
   About 150 tourists took refuge at the Cancun city hall.
Honeymooner Sheila Fournier of Long Island said she and her
husband, Pete, had been evacuated from the Villas Playa Hotel.
   ``It had an ocean-front view _ which is now washed away,'' she
said.
   Officials were checking low-lying areas of Cancun for stranded
residents. There was heavy damage visible to the humble wood and
thatch homes typical of the Yucatan.
   ``There were some people who did not want to leave yesterday,''
the army official said. ``It was something new. They didn't know
what a cyclone was.''
   At midnight EDT Gilbert was centered near latitude 21.5 north,
longitude 90.2 west and approaching the north coast of Yucatan,
about 60 miles east-northeast of the provincial capital, Merida,
the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla., said. The
storm was about 550 miles southeast of Brownsville, Texas, the
center said in a statement.
   Gilbert was moving west-northwest at 15 mph and winds had
decreased to 125 mph. The Mexican National Weather Service reported
winds gusting as high as 218 mph earlier Wednesday with sustained
winds of 179 mph.
   Earlier Wednesday Gilbert was classified as a Category 5 storm,
the strongest ad deadliest type of hurricane. Such storms have
maximum sustained winds greater than 155 mph and can cause
catastrophic damage.
   By Wednesday night the National Hurricane Center downgraded it
to a Category 4, but center director Bob Sheets said:``There's no
question it'll strengthen again once it comes off the Yucatan
Peninsula and gets back in open water.''
   As Gilbert moved away from the Yucatan Peninsula Wednesday
night, the hurricane formed a double eye, two concentric circles of
thunderstorms often characteristic of a strong storm that has
crossed land and is moving over the water again.
   One eye was about eight miles wide, and the second about 25
miles wide, said hurricane center meteorologist Jesse Moore. ``This
is one of the features that we expected to see as the hurricane
moved back over the water, and we do expect intensification,'' he
said.
   Only two Category 5 hurricanes have hit the United States _ the
1935 storm that killed 408 people in Florida and Hurricane Camille
that devastated the Mississippi coast in 1969, killing 256 people.
   Oil companies evacuated thousands of workers from rigs in the
Gulf of Mexico.
   The peninsula ports of Campeche, Celestum, Progreso, Sinzal,
Ucaltepen, Tel-Chac, Cancun, Puerto Morelos, and Ciudad del Carmen
were closed, the government news agency Notimex said. Airports in
the region were closed.
   ``The sound of the wind outside is horrible,'' said receptionist
Pablo Torres at Cancun's Hotel Carrillos as the storm approached.
   The National Hurricane Center said a hurricane watch was in
effect on the Texas coast from Brownsville to Port Arthur and along
the coast of northeast Mexico from Tampico north.
   In Mexico City, the National Civil Defense System said it lost
telephone contact with Cancun and Cozumel at about 8 a.m. EDT.
   Public buildings in Cancun were used as shelters, said Cecila
Lavalle, a spokesman for Quintana Roo state government in Chetumal,
155 miles southeast of Cozumel.
   Jennie Valdez, a U.S. consular representative in Cancun, said
she did not know how many tourists were in Cancun, but government
figures estimate 40,000 to 65,000 monthly visitors.
   Hurricane warnings were in effect for the entire Yucatan
Peninsula and widespread evacuations were reported.
   Winds destroyed at least 100 homes in slums of Valladolid, a
town of about 45,000 about 100 miles from Cozumel, Alberto Pol, a
judicial police officer, said by telephone.
   The National Hurricane Center said Gilbert was the most intense
storm on record in terms of barometric pressure. It was measured at
26.31 inches, breaking the 26.35 inches recorded for the 1935
hurricane that devastated the Florida Keys.
   ``That's the lowest pressure ever measured in the Western
Hemisphere,'' said forecaster Mark Zimmer.
   On Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, Gilbert pounded the Dominican
Republic, Jamaica and the Cayman Islands.
   Seaga said Jamaica would need $8 billion in aid. Officials in
the Dominican Republic, sideswiped Sunday by the storm, reported
five dead.
   Gilbert also buffeted the Cayman Islands, but no deaths were
reported.



 AP880916-0060 
AP-NR-09-16-88 0410EDT
r a PM-Hurricane-Strength     09-16 0543
PM-Hurricane-Strength,0560
What Makes Gilbert So Strong?
With PM-Hurricane Gilbert, Bjt
By A.J. DICKERSON
Associated Press Writer
MIAMI (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert's growth from a harmless low
pressure zone off Africa to a ferocious killer in the Gulf of
Mexico was fueled by a combination of heat, moisture and wind that
baffles forecasters.
   ``It's a matter of getting everything together in the right
place in the right time,'' Gil Clark of the National Hurricane
Center said Thursday. ``It doesn't happen very often. How it
develops, we don't know.''
   Gilbert came to the attention of center forecasters Sept. 3 as a
dry low pressure trough moving west out of Africa.
   ``We get 50 or 60 of these off Africa every summer. About one of
six develop,'' said Clark.
   By Sept. 8, the system became a depression. It reached tropical
storm status by Saturday and a hurricane Sunday.
   A tropical wave becomes a depression when winds start swirling.
When sustained winds reach 39 mph, the system becomes a named
tropical storm. It reaches hurricane status when sustained winds
hit 74 mph.
   Why Gilbert organized and strengthened while other systems
didn't ``is a mystery more or less,'' said University of Miami
meteorology Professor Rainer Bleck.
   ``The first part of the summer we were biting our nails,
wondering why these (other) disturbances didn't develop,'' he said
Thursday. ``That's something meteorologists would like to know more
about.''
   But the scientists do know what fuels a budding storm once
development begins. And they know that development is sparked when
winds converge, and that growth is affected by time and place.
   ``If that happens in an area where there's plenty of moisture in
the lower atmosphere (the bottom 10,000 feet or so), this
convergence may lead to upward motion and cloud formation,'' Bleck
said.
   ``If clouds form, the heat of condensation in the clouds
occasionally provides `positive feedback' to the convergence
pattern. That strengthens it,'' he said, adding that storms can
begin budding only off the equator because of the Earth's rotation.
   Eventually, a vortex is created.
   ``Any time you contract an air mass, they will start spinning.
That's what makes the tornadoes, hurricanes and blizzards, those
winter storms,'' Bleck said.
   Hurricanes ``are useful to the climate machine. Their primary
role is to transport heat from the lower to the upper atmosphere,''
he said. ``The sun puts energy into the water, the top of the
oceans and lowest part of the atmosphere. That has to be
distributed from the bottom to higher levels of the atmosphere.''
   When the depression that would become Gilbert neared Barbados,
warm Atlantic waters nurtured it.
   ``This time of year in the northwest Caribbean is best for
development,'' Clark said. ``If you get a storm in this area in
September, when the water's warmest, it can just explode. This is
where Camille formed and exploded,'' referring to the 1969 storm
that slammed into the Gulf Coast.
   ``It is an exciting thing to watch. If you're on the beach
watching the storm surge, it's a different story,'' he said.
   The hurricane center said Gilbert was the most intense storm on
record in terms of barometric pressure, measured at 26.13 inches
Tuesday night. That broke the 26.35 inches of the 1935 hurricane
that devastated the Florida Keys.



 WSJ880912-0064 
 Hurricane Gilbert Heading for Jamaica With 100 MPH Winds 
 
 LATAM 
 SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP)  

   Hurricane Gilbert swept toward Jamaica yesterday with 100-mile-an-hour winds, and officials issued warnings to residents on the southern coasts of the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Cuba. 

   The storm ripped the roofs off houses and caused coastal flooding in Puerto Rico. 
In the Dominican Republic, all domestic flights and flights to and from Puerto Rico and Miami were canceled. 

   Forecasters said the hurricane was gaining strength as it passed over the ocean and would dump heavy rain on the Dominican Republic and Haiti as it moved south of Hispaniola, the Caribbean island they share, and headed west. 

   "It's still gaining strength. 
It's certainly one of the larger systems we've seen in the Caribbean for a long time," said Hal Gerrish, forecaster at the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla. 

   At 3 p.m. EDT, the center of the hurricane was about 100 miles south of the Dominican Republic and 425 miles east of Kingston, Jamaica. 
The hurricane was moving west at about 15 mph and was expected to continue this motion for the next 24 hours. 
Forecasters said the hurricane's track would take it about 50 miles south of southwestern Haiti. 

   The hurricane center said small craft in the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico should remain in port until conditions improve. 

   The forecasters said the Dominican Republic would get as much as 10 inches of rain yesterday, with similar amounts falling in Haiti last night and tonight. 
Hurricane warnings were issued for the south coast of Haiti and Cuba by their respective governments. 
In Jamaica, the government issued a hurricane watch for the entire island. 

   Tropical Storm Gilbert formed in the eastern Caribbean and strengthened into a hurricane Saturday night. 

   In Puerto Rico, besides tearing off several roofs, the storm caused coastal flooding and brought down power lines and trees along roads and highways in the west and southwestern regions. 

   Three people were injured in Guayanilla, Puerto Rico, when a tree fell on their vehicle as they traveled along Route 97, police reported. 
Four policemen stationed on Mona Island, between Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, were stranded as a result of the weather. 




 AP891018-0301 
AP-NR-10-18-89 1832EDT
u f AM-SFQuake-Insurance     10-18 0653
AM-SF Quake-Insurance,0672
Many Homeowners Not Insured; Analysts Say Disaster May Benefit Insurers
By DEAN GOLEMBESKI
Associated Press Writer
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) 

   Most San Francisco-area homeowners may
have to pay for damage from Tuesday's earthquake out of their own
pockets, while insurance companies may reap long-term benefits from
higher rates, industry spokesmen and analysts said Wednesday.
   Only 15 percent to 20 percent of California homeowners have
earthquake insurance, which typically requires a 10 percent
deductible and costs between $200 to $400 a year for a $100,000
home, according to industry spokesmen.
   The Association of California Insurance Cos. in Sacramento said
that in the San Francisco area roughly 25 to 30 percent of the
homes have earthquake insurance. The organization estimated
residential damages from Tuesday's earthquake at $500 million in
the Bay area, with between $100 million to $150 million insured.
   Insured homeowners without earthquake protection will get
reimbursed only if their homes were ravaged by fire, which is
covered under basic homeowner insurance polices, said Hugh Strawn,
director of catastrophe services at the Property Loss Research
Bureau in Schaumburg, Ill.
   Insurance companies attempted Wednesday to assess the amount of
quake-related damages they're likely to have to pay. In addition to
home damage, the companies likely will get claims for automobile
damage, broken glass, theft and burglary, business interruption due
to electrical outages, water damage and, possibly, workers
compensation.
   Some estimated that insurers might face bills totaling $1
billion or more from the quake. But industry observers said they
don't expect any company to suffer serious financial damage from
quake-related claims.
   ``We don't think any company is going to have problems paying
claims,'' said Elisa Siegal, public affairs manager for the
American Insurance Association, a Washington-based trade group.
   The insurers actually could benefit. Industry analysts predicted
insurers would be able to reverse three years of declining rates
and win rate hikes from state regulators due to the quake damages
and the estimated $4 billion in damages from Hurricane Hugo, which
hammered South Carolina and other parts of the southeastern United
States earlier this month.
   An increase in insurance rates could translate into greater
profitability in the long term, the analysts said.
   ``There's a perception that this could turn the cycle ... that
this could be enough to firm pricing,'' said Gloria L. Vogel, an
analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc. in New York.
   Despite their predictions for the long run, the analysts warned
that fourth-quarter earnings among insurance companies are likely
to be disappointing.
   ``It's going to be a meaningful loss, perhaps as big as Hugo,''
said Robert Glasspiegel, an analyst with Hartford-based Langen
McAlenney.
   On the New York Stock Exchange, some insurance company stock
rose on Wednesday. Aetna Life & Casualty Co. rose $2.37{ to $59.50
a share; ITT Corp., parent of The Hartford, was up 37{ cents to
$59; and the Travelers Cos. rose $1 to $40.87{.
   Reinsurance companies, which absorb risk from policy writers,
did especially well. General Re Corp. rose $2.75 to $86.50 and
Marsh & McLennan Cos. rose $3.12{ to $75.87{.
   In California, earthquake insurance is an emotional and
politically-charged issue. Roughly two-thirds of all insurance
policies written in the United States are sold in California, where
many of the nation's most damaging earthquakes have occurred..
   Under a 1985 California law, insurers are required to offer
earthquake insurance to homebuyers, but homebuyers are not required
to buy the coverage.
   Insurers aren't required to offer earthquake insurance to
commercial property owners, but the percentage of business property
with the coverage is very high, industry spokesmen said. They
estimated that at least 25 percent, and probably many more,
business properties are insured.
   Because of its high costs, earthquake insurance has become a
target of the controversial Proposition 103 approved by California
voters last year. The proposition calls for a 20 percent rollback
in insurance rates. Insurers and state regulators are battling over
the rates and how they're set.



 LA102089-0177 
 123463 


October 20, 1989, Friday, Home Edition 




Special Section; Part Q; Page 12; Column 4; Metro Desk 




151 words 




THE BAY AREA QUAKE; 


WHAT NEXT?; 


PONDERING THE LESSONS, HEALING THE SCARS 




"I've been wandering around San Francisco and it's like the blind man trying to 
feel an elephant. We're just now figuring out bits and pieces of this 
disaster." -- Tom Tobin, of the California Seismic Safety Commission. 




"It was like somebody slugging a punching bag. Usually earthquakes pass, but 
this one went on and on. It just wouldn't stop...It was very, very bad." -- 
Schoolteacher Flora Churnin, who was at her Silicon Valley town of Sunnyvale 
when the earthquake struck. 




"At first I thought the smoke was fog. Then I could see a big ball of flame." 
-- Cecile Candone, who was driving south toward San Francisco from the Sonoma 
wine country when she spotted the Marina district fire. 




"This upper deck was absolutely shaking, the light stanchions were blowing back 
and forth." -- Suzyn Waldman, a reporter covering the World Series at 
Candlestick Park for a New York radio station. 




EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; EARTHQUAKES -- NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; OAKLAND (CA); 
DISASTER VICTIMS 




 LA102489-0131 
 125161 


October 24, 1989, Tuesday, Home Edition 




Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 1; Editorial Writers Desk 




652 words 




A SPECIAL SESSION, WITH SPEED 




Gov. George Deukmejian is right to call the Legislature into special session 
within the next two weeks to deal with the effects of last Tuesday's Northern 
California earthquake. With Congress already moving to grant up to $3 billion 
in relief, earthquake victims need to know that state officials are prepared to 
come up with the state's share of disaster and reconstruction aid as soon as 
possible, and as soon as is practical. Deukmejian should be commended, as well, 
for advising state officials to do all they can to expedite aid to earthquake 
victims without getting too tangled up in red tape. 


The governor is wrong, however, in his campaign to distance himself from the 
California Department of Transportation on the issue of what caused the Nimitz 
Freeway in Oakland to collapse, and what could or should have been done to have 
prevented it. While Deukmejian is not necessarily blaming Caltrans, he seems to 
be preparing himself for such investigatory questions as: "What did you know 
and when did you know it?" 


The governor's answer, which he has been repeating ever since the day of the 
quake, was that no one in Caltrans ever told him a freeway might collapse in an 
earthquake. He was shocked that such a thing would happen. This has the 
earmarks of a preemptive defense against any allegation that California stinted 
on highway reinforcement because transportation funds have been short during 
his administration, possibly because he had opposed a gasoline tax increase. 


There is keen interest, of course, in why the freeway collapsed, and whether 
something might have been done. The major reason is so that California can 
learn from the experience as it designs new roads and reinforces existing ones 
against the next quake. There has been no widespread outcry against the 
governor. While the Department of Transportation and the state Transportation 
Commission do exercise considerable control over the allocation of highway 
funds, the governor also sets general state priorities. 


The governor complained on Sunday that the highway engineers never came to him 
and told him that bridges or freeways might collapse in an earthquake. But no 
one who has lived in California more than a few months would rule out the 
chance that any bridge or freeway could collapse in the right kind of 
earthquake. California is on the edge of earthquake-related technology, but 
still does not know everything that needs to be known. The state learns more 
from every earthquake and a critical need now is to learn everything possible 
from Tuesday, Oct. 17. 


But it is also the time to concentrate on helping quake victims through these 
most trying days of their experience -- the period when the emergency response 
is over and people face the dreary details of restoring their life to some kind 
of normality. In the Bay Area, that includes hundreds of thousands of commuters 
who did not suffer personal damage, but face massive obstacles in getting to 
work. 


The governor and legislative leaders will meet again next Monday to determine 
the timing and agenda of a special session. It almost certainly would include a 
temporary gasoline-tax increase to deal with highway reconstruction and repair 
and possible general revenues for other forms of disaster relief. Existing law 
already gives the governor considerable discretion in diverting reserve funds 
on hand to the Office of Emergency Services for allocation to local 
governments. But the need could well exceed the present reserve. The scope of 
the disaster would seem to justify a temporary surcharge. 


The governor and Legislature should not wait too long to start the session, 
although they do not yet have precise damage estimates or know just how much 
the federal government will send to California. The Legislature can begin 
organizing its staff and committees now so the appropriate legislation can be 
passed as soon as that information is obtained. 




Editorial 




 WSJ891019-0021 
 = 891019 
 891019-0021. 
 The Bay Area Earthquake:
@  Bush Makes Sure He Acts
@  Speedily on Quake Crisis 
 10/19/89 
 WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) 
 EXECUTIVE (EXE) 
 WASHINGTON  

   The White House is making sure nobody will accuse it of taking this crisis lightly. 

   In the aftermath of the California earthquake, President Bush and his aides flew into a whirlwind of earthquake-related activity yesterday morning. 
Some of it was necessary to get federal help flowing to victims, but some seemed designed mostly to project an image of a White House in action. 

   Mr. Bush and his aides were accused of responding too slowly after the Exxon Valdez oil tanker split open in Alaskan waters and Hurricane Hugo struck the Carolina coast, and they clearly don't want a repeat of those charges now. 
So the White House announced that Mr. Bush got his first earthquake briefing of the day at 6:30 a.m. from chief of staff John Sununu. 

   By noon, Mr. Bush had taken two phone calls from Vice President Dan Quayle, who was in California; made a televised statement of concern; signed a disaster proclamation; received a written report from the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and visited FEMA headquarters. 

   Mr. Bush himself essentially acknowledged that he and his aides were trying to head off criticism. 
On his FEMA visit, Mr. Bush said that he hoped there would be "less carping" about the emergency office's performance this time, adding that the agency "took a hit" for its reaction to Hurricane Hugo. 

   The White House already is talking of Mr. Bush visiting the California earthquake site this weekend. 
He visited the Hugo devastation but not until after local leaders urged him to do so. 




 WSJ891019-0086 
 = 891019 
 891019-0086. 
 The Bay Area Earthquake:
@  Insurance Firms Expected
@  To Pay Billions of Dollars
@  ----
@  By Beatrice E. Garcia and Karen Slater
@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal 
 10/19/89 
 WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) 
 S AET FFC CI AIG GRN MMC 
 INSURANCE (INS) 

   Insurers face the prospect of paying out billions of dollars for damages caused by this week's California earthquake. 

   Getting a grip on the extent of the damages is proving a far more difficult task than what insurers faced after Hurricane Hugo ripped through the Caribbean and the Carolinas last month. 
The earthquake's toll, including possible deep structural damage, goes far beyond the more easily observed damage from a hurricane, says George Reider, a vice president in Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co.'s claims division. 

   But investors are betting that the financial and psychological impact of the earthquake, coming so soon after the hurricane, will help stem more than two years of intense price-cutting wars among business insurers. 
Reflecting that logic, insurance-company stocks posted strong gains. 

   Aetna and other insurers are hiring engineers and architects to help them assess structural damage. 
Most insurers already have mobilized their "catastrophe" teams to begin processing claims from their policyholders in northern California. 

   Since commercial air travel is interrupted, Aetna, based in Hartford, Conn., chartered three planes to fly claims adjusters into Sacramento and then planned for them to drive to the Bay area. 
About 25 adjusters were dispatched yesterday afternoon, along with laptop computers, cellular phones and blank checks. 

   Some adjusters, already in other parts of California, drove to the disaster area with recreational vehicles and mobile homes that could be used as makeshift claims-processing centers. 

   Insurers will be advertising 800 numbers -- probably on the radio -- that policyholders can call to get assistance on how to submit claims. 

   State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., the largest home and auto insurer in California, believes the losses from the earthquake could be somewhat less than the $475 million in damages it expects to pay out for claims resulting from Hurricane Hugo. 
State Farm, based in Bloomington, Ind., is also the largest writer of personal-property earthquake insurance in California. 

   Earthquake insurance is sold as a separate policy or a specific endorsement "rider" on a homeowner's policy in California, because of the area's vulnerability to earthquakes. 
State Farm said about 25% of its policyholders in California have also purchased earthquake insurance. 
Allstate Insurance Co., a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co., said about 23% of its personal property policyholders -- about 28% in the San Franciso area -- also have earthquake coverage. 

   The Association of California Insurance Companies estimated damage to residential property could total $500 million, but only $100 million to $150 million is insured, it said. 

   Officials from the American Insurance Association's property-claim service division, which coordinates the efforts of the claims adjusters in an area after a natural disaster, will be flying to San Francisco today. 
They expect to have a preliminary estimate of the damages in a day or two. 

   Roads and bridges in the Bay area appear to have suffered some of the most costly damage. 
Highways, such as the section of Interstate 880 that collapsed in Oakland, generally don't have insurance coverage. 
Industry officials say the Bay Bridge -- unlike some bridges -- has no earthquake coverage, either, so the cost of repairing it probably would have to be paid out of state general operating funds. 

   However, the bridge, which charges a $1 toll each way, does have "loss of income" insurance to replace lost revenue if the operation of the bridge is interrupted for more than seven days. 
That coverage is provided by a syndicate of insurance companies including Fireman's Fund Corp., based in Novato, Calif., and Cigna Corp., based in Philadelphia. 

   Earthquake-related claims aren't expected to cause significant financial problems for the insurance industry as a whole. 
Instead, even with the liabilities of two natural disasters in recent weeks, analysts said the total capital of the industry is likely to be higher at year end than it was at midyear. 

   Indeed, the earthquake could contribute to a turnaround in the insurance cycle in a couple of ways. 
For example, insurers may seek to limit their future exposure to catastrophes by increasing the amount of reinsurance they buy. 
Such increased demand for reinsurance, along with the losses the reinsurers will bear from these two disasters, are likely to spur increases in reinsurance prices that will later be translated into an overall price rise. 
Reinsurance is protection taken out by the insurance firms themselves. 

   "We are saying this is the breaking point, this is the event that will change the psychology of the marketplace," said William Yankus, an analyst with Conning & Co., a Hartford firm that specializes in the insurance industry. 
His firm, along with some others, issued new buy recommendations on insurer stocks yesterday. 

   Among the insurance stocks, big gainers included American International Group, up $3.25 to $102.625; General Re Corp., up $2.75 to $86.50; Aetna, up $2.375 to $59.50; and Marsh & McLennan Inc., up $3.125 to $75.875. 

   Still, a few individual companies, most likely smaller ones, could be devastated. 
"I think there is a damned good chance someone is going to hit the skids on this," said Oppenheimer & Co. analyst Myron Picoult. 
He suspects some insurers who had purchased reinsurance to limit their exposure to catastrophes will discover that reinsurance was used up by Hurricane Hugo. 

   British, West German, Scandinavian and other overseas insurers are bracing for big claims from the San Francisco earthquake disaster. 
Although it's unclear how much exposure the London market will face, U.K. underwriters traditionally have a large reinsurance exposure to U.S. catastrophe coverage. 
Jack Byrne, chairman of Fireman's Fund, said this disaster will test the catastrophe reinsurance market, causing these rates to soar. 

   The catastrophe losses sustained by insurers this year will probably be the worst on an inflation-adjusted basis since 1906 -- when another earthquake sparked the Great San Francisco Fire. 
Orin Kramer, an insurance consultant in New York, estimates that the 1906 San Francisco destruction, on an inflation-adjusted basis, included insured losses of $5.8 billion. 
He is estimating this week's disaster will generate insured losses of $2 billion to $4 billion, following about $4 billion in costs to insurers from Hurricane Hugo. 




 AP890922-0071 
AP-NR-09-22-89 0634EDT
u i Britain-Blast 3rdLd-Writethru a0526 09-22 0467
Britain-Blast, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0526,0477
Eight Dead, Up to 18 Missing After Explosion at Marine Band Complex
Eds: LEADS with 7 grafs to UPDATE with eight dead, Scotland Yard
sending anti-terrorist unit to investigate; pickup 7th graf pvs, `Ten doctors...'
By LESLIE SHEPHERD
Associated Press Writer
LONDON (AP) 

   An explosion rocked the Royal Marines School of
Music in a southeastern coastal town today, causing one building to
collapse and killing eight people, officials said. Thirty people
were injured and up to 18 were missing and feared trapped in the
rubble.
   The blast occurred at at 8:26 a.m. in a lounge in the barracks
near Deal, about 70 miles southeast of London, the Defense Ministry
said.
   ``The building has collapsed,'' said a ministry spokesman,
speaking anonymously in keeping with British custom.
   ``We've no idea of the cause of the blast at the moment. It is
too early to tell.''
   Scotland Yard said a forensic team from its anti-terrorist squad
had been called in to help investigate.
   Firefighters used heavy lifting equipment and thermal cameras to
search for those trapped in the debris, said Kent Fire Brigade
spokesman Kevin Simmons.
   Kent police said 17 or 18 people were trapped. The Defense
Ministry said seven were missing.
   Ten doctors gave emergency treatment at the scene and 11
ambulances took the injured to two hospitals, the ambulance service
said.
   ``They are suffering from flash burns to their head and arms,
fractures, and the sort of injuries you would expect after an
explosion,'' said a spokesman for Buckland Hospital in Dover, 20
miles south of Deal.
   South Eastern British Gas sent investigators to the scene but
said there was nothing to indicate the explosion was caused by a gas
leak. Gas supplies to the barracks were cut as a precautionary
measure, a spokesman said.
   Guy Platts, who owns a bookstore in Deal, located 20 miles north
of the English Channel port of Dover, said he heard a ``massive
explosion. ... There are dozens of ambulances, police and fire
brigade making their way there.''
   Military targets on the British mainland have been attacked
several times by the Irish Republican Army in the past year as part
of its campaign to rid Northern Ireland of British rule.
   One soldier was killed and nine wounded in an IRA attack on an
army barracks in north London in August 1988. About 60 soldiers
narrowly escaped death or injury in February when they were
evacuated from their barracks in Shropshire, western England, just
before a bomb exploded.
   In July 1982, eight soldiers died in IRA bombings near the
Household Cavalry barracks at Knightsbridge in central London and at
a bandstand in the capital's Regent's Park where an army band was
playing. Three people died later and a total of 51 were injured in
the bombings.



 AP890922-0103 
AP-NR-09-22-89 1143EDT
u i PM-Blast-Witnesses 1stLd-Writethru   09-22 0511
PM-Blast-Witnesses, 1st Ld-Writethru,a0566,0525
Neighbors Tell of Being Jolted out of Bed by `Blitz' Blast
Eds: Subs 3rd pvs, ``The Irish...' with 1 graf to ADD police count
of casualties. Pickup 4th pvs, `Nearby resident...'
With PM-Britain-Blast
By MAUREEN JOHNSON
Associated Press Writer
DEAL, England (AP) 

   Neighbors were breakfasting, heading to work
or asleep in bed when an explosion at a military barracks turned
their homes to rubble and they were confronted with the sight of
bodies being carried away.
   ``There was a terrific crash which reminded me of the Blitz.
After that, the ceiling started to fall down around me,'' said Joan
Betteridge, a pensioner in the southern England town of Deal, where
the blast at the Royal Marines School of Music occurred.
   The Irish Republican Army claimed reponsibilty for the explosion,
which police said killed 11 people and injured 22.
   Nearby resident Sean Minnock said: ``I was asleep but woke up
with a hell of a jolt ... the bedroom ceiling fell in on me. I woke
to find huge slabs of plaster on the bed and floor.''
   From the wrecked, smoke-clouded barracks, ``I could hear
terrified screams of agony. People started rushing about all over
the place. It was horrible to watch and listen to,'' said Minnock,
28.
   ``I knew people had been seriously hurt. I saw the rescuers pull
out two bodies. I knew they were dead when they put them on the
floor and put bed blankets right over them.''
   Minnock's wife, Janet, said the roof of their house was torn off
and all the back windows were shattered.
   ``The house has been blown to bits,'' she said.
   Mrs. Minnock was feeding her 2-year-old son Thomas his breakfast
when the explosion wrecked four terraced houses in the street
backing onto the barracks.
   Her next-door neighbor, Heather Hackett, 26, was standing at her
kitchen window facing the barracks, holding her 4-month-old son Luke
in her arms. Her other boys, Ben, 3, and Joshua, 2, were at her side.
   ``I looked up from the sink and I just saw the whole building
explode,'' she said. ``I told the boys to run and as Joshua turned a
sliver of glass embedded itself in his back.
   ``The whole window was blown across the kitchen. I just screamed
and ran out of the room. The bang was so loud I thought the whole
house was coming in.
   ``At first I thought for sure Joshua had been seriously injured.
There was blood coming out of his back.'' Doctors removed the glass
and sent him home.
   College student Simon Mitford, 17, narrowly escaped being injured
in the explosion because he got up earlier than usual.
   ``His room was completely wrecked by the blast,'' his brother
Alex said.
   Of the barracks, he said: ``I heard music playing and then it
went bang and there was glass everywhere. It was a two-story
building but now 90 percent of it is rubble.
   ``I heard a marine scream out, `The band is under there.' I was
scared there was going to be a second explosion.''



 AP890922-0117 
AP-NR-09-22-89 1241EDT
u i PM-Britain-Blast 9thLd-Writethru a0619 09-22 0844
PM-Britain-Blast, 9th Ld-Writethru, a0619,0865
11 Dead, 22 Injured in IRA Explosion
Eds: Leads with 4 grafs to UPDATE with all accounted for, many of
the injured seriously hurt. Pickup 4th graf, ``There was...''
LaserPhoto LON6
By MAUREEN JOHNSON
Associated Press Writer
DEAL, England (AP) 

   An explosion today flattened a military
barracks and tore through nearby homes, killing 11 people and
injuring 22, police said. The IRA claimed responsibility for the
blast.
   More than 100 rescue workers frantically dug through the rubble
of a three-story building that collapsed at the Royal Marines School
of Music near Deal. Stunned neighbors gathered outside homes that
were damaged or destroyed.
   Chief Police Inspector Alan Butterfield of Kent, who who provided
the casualty figures and coordinated the rescue effort, first
reported that one person was missing but later said everyone was
accounted for.
   He said many of the injured were seriously hurt.
   ``There was a terrific crash which reminded me of the Blitz.
After that, the ceiling started to fall down around me,'' said
pensioner Joan Betteridge.
   Defense Secretary Tom King, inspecting the wreckage, said: ``It
is not yet absolutely confirmed that it is a bomb, but all the
evidence is quite clearly that this is an IRA atrocity.''
   British military installations are a frequent bombing target of
the Irish Republican Army in its campaign to rid Northern Ireland of
British rule, but today's explosion in the coastal town 70 miles
southeast of London was the worst IRA attack on the British mainland
in more than seven years.
   The explosion occurred at at 8:26 a.m. in a lounge in the
barracks. One of the bands had just stopped playing on the parade
ground, said a ministry spokesman, speaking anonymously in keeping
with British custom.
   Dozens of homes near the school were damaged, including four that
were destroyed. Witnesses reported hearing the explosion two miles
away.
   The Defense Ministry would not say how many servicemen and
civilians were included in the casualty figures. However, King told
reporters the attack was directed against ``unarmed bandsmen.''
   Firefighters used heavy lifting equipment and thermal cameras to
search through the debris, said Kent Fire Brigade spokesman Kevin
Simmons.
   Ten doctors were giving emergency treatment at the scene and 11
ambulances were taking the injured to two hospitals, the ambulance
service said.
   A statement telephoned to Ireland International, a Dublin news
agency, said ``we have visited the Royal Marines in Kent'' in
response to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's visit to Northern
Ireland nine days ago.
   The IRA said Mrs. Thatcher went to the British province ``with a
message of war,'' but ``we still want peace and we want the British
government to leave our country.'' It was signed P. O'Neill, a nom
de guerre the IRA usually uses to claim responsibility for actions
outside Northern Ireland.
   Irish Prime Minister Charles Haughey issued a statement in Dublin
condemning the attack, calling it an ``outrage.''
   The last IRA bomb attempt on the British mainland was in February
when about 60 soldiers were evacuated from their barracks in
Shropshire, western England, just before a bomb exploded. One
soldier was killed and nine wounded in an IRA bomb attack on an army
barracks in north London in August 1988.
   In July 1982, eight soldiers died in IRA bombings near the
Household Cavalry barracks in central London and at a bandstand in
the capital's Regent's Park where an army band was playing. Three
people died later and a total of 51 were injured in the bombings.
   The music school is the training center for young recruits who
want to play in the seven Royal Marines bands. Up to 250 young men,
most between 16 and 20, are based at the school, where they receive
military and musical training.
   The roof of Janet Minnock's house was torn off by the force of
the blast and all the back windows were shattered.
   ``The house has been blown to bits,'' she said. ``We are all
shaken up.''
   Mrs. Minnock's next-door neighbor, Heather Hackett, said she was
standing at her kitchen window facing the barracks at the time of
the explosion. She was holding her 4-month-old son Luke in her arms
with her other boys, Ben, 3, and Joshua, 2, at her side.
   ``I looked up from the sink and I just saw the whole building
explode,'' she said. ``I told the boys to run and as Joshua turned a
slither of glass embedded itself in his back. The whole window was
blown across the kitchen. I just screamed and ran out of the room.
The bang was so loud I thought the whole house was coming in.''
   Sean Minnock said: ``I was asleep but woke up with a hell of a
jolt.''
   As workers tried to patch holes in his roof, he said: ``The
bedroom ceiling fell in on me. I woke to find huge slabs of plaster
on the bed and floor. I wondered what it was. As soon as I got up I
looked out of what was left of the window and knew it was the
barracks.''



 AP890923-0012 
AP-NR-09-23-89 0100EDT
u i PM-Britain-Blast Bjt   09-23 0782
PM-Britain-Blast, Bjt,0808
IRA Attack Stirs Security Controversy
By MAUREEN JOHNSON
Associated Press Writer
DEAL, England (AP) 

   The IRA bombing that killed 10 men and blew
apart a building at the Royal Marines Music School outraged Britons
and stirred recriminations over safety standards at the school.
   A huge explosion in a barracks staff room Friday morning leveled
the three-story building as bandsmen took a coffee break between
practice sessions on the school's parade ground.
   Twelve of the 22 people injured were hospitalized, eight of them
in serious condition, police said. They said nine of the dead were
bandsmen and one other man was not immediately identified.
   Dozens of neighboring homes in the quiet southeastern English
seaside town of Deal were damaged.
   Although trainees at the school range in age from 16 to 20, Col.
John Ware, principal director of music, said the slain bandsmen all
were trained, adult musicians. They held military ranks but none had
been trained as a fighting soldier.
   The outlawed Irish Republican Army, engaged in a 20-year-old
campaign to drive the British from the province of Northern Ireland,
claimed responsibility in a telephone call to Ireland International,
a Dublin news agency.
   Residents of the area adjoining the Marines school said Friday
that despite government calls for stepped-up public alertness
against terrorists, security at the school had eased noticeably.
   ``Anyone in Deal will tell you how easy it is to get into the
base,'' said Fred Verge, a 70-year-old army veteran.
   Local people laid wreaths and bouquets of flowers at the entrance
to the barracks.
   ``There is a great sense of anger'' in the community, Kent police
Chief Constable Paul Condon said.
   The Royal Marines Music School is one of 30 military
establishments in Britain that use private security firms, Defense
Ministry figures show.
   Unidentified defense sources quoted by the Times newspaper today
said the civilian guards were backed up by armed Marines who
patrolled regularly inside the perimeter.
   Defense Secretary Tom King promised a security review and said
new measures had already been taken at the base. He did not
elaborate.
   Martin O'Neill, the opposition Labor Party's spokesman on
defense, said on Friday: ``Serious questions must be asked about the
penny-pinching policy of the Ministry of Defense, which may well put
our armed services at dreadful risk.''
   O'Neill later told British Broadcasting Corp. television the IRA
was ``prepared to take out anybody. The cowardly nature of their
attacks is such that every military establishment is under threat.''
   He said private security firms were assigned to areas considered
low risks for attacks.
   ``If we designate places as being low-risk categories, then it is
likely they will be attacked, given the way that the IRA is forced
to operate,'' O'Neill added.
   ``The big prizes are no longer available to them, so they're
picking off the ones which they regard ... vulnerable.''
   Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher received news of the bombing
while aboard a jet over Siberia en route from Japan to Moscow. She
called it a ``deeply serious outrage.''
   King visited the scene soon after the explosion.
   ``I know that the people who committed it, the godfathers who
sent them, actually know in their hearts that it is not going to
make any difference; that it is just killing for the sake of
killing,'' he said.
   The defense minister, anger clearly written on his face, said
that rather than erode the will of the security forces, the attack
``redoubles their determination to ensure that terrorism cannot
win.''
   Prime Minister Charles Haughey of Ireland condemned the attack
and sent Mrs. Thatcher a message of sympathy at ``this outrage ...
which has caused severe and tragic loss of life and many injuries.''
   The mainly Roman Catholic IRA claim gave no details of the
operation, but said it was a response to a ``message of war''
delivered by Mrs. Thatcher when she visited Northern Ireland nine
days ago.
   It was an apparent reference to her speech praising the locally
recruited Ulster Defense Regiment as ``a very, very brave group of
men'' who have lost 179 members in IRA attacks since 1970.
   The mainly Protestant UDR is regarded by many Catholics as a
sectarian force, and is at present under a cloud over allegations
that some recruits leaked names, addresses and photos of IRA
suspects to Protestant assassins.
   British military installations are a frequent target of the IRA
campaign. Friday's attack was the worst since July 1982 when 11
servicemen were fatally wounded in two bombings in central London.
   The music school trains young recruits for the seven Royal
Marines bands. Up to 250 young men, most ages 16 to 20, undergo
military and musical training there, working with older,
professional bandsmen.



 AP890923-0091 
AP-NR-09-23-89 1402EDT
u i AM-Britain-Blast     09-23 0521
AM-Britain-Blast,0538
Police Search Local House for Clues to Marines Attack
DEAL, England (AP) 

   Family members on Saturday grieved for their
slain loved ones and criticized the security arrangements at the
Royal Marines Music School, where an IRA terrorist attack killed 10
military musicians.
   Jean Cleatheroe, whose son Andrew was killed, joined local
residents and opposition politicians in denouncing the use of
private security firms to protect the music school and 29 other
military establishments in Britain.
   ``The security at those barracks was absolutely abysmal. We had
seen it for ourselves. We have always said how easy it would be for
anyone to get in ... What could ordinary security men do to stop
terrorists?'' she said.
   British military installations are a frequent target of the IRA's
campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland and unite the
predominantly Protestant province with the mainly Roman Catholic
Republic of Ireland.
   Friday's attack was the worst since July 1982, when 11 servicemen
were fatally wounded in bombings in central London.
   Shocked residents of Deal gathered outside the barracks to lay
flowers in tribute to the young men they called the ``Bandies.''
   An 11-year-old Royal Marines cadet in full dress uniform marched
to the barracks and smartly saluted the Royal Marines sign.
   ``I'm proud of my uniform and I'm proud of all the Marines I
knew. I hate the people who did this to them,'' said Scott Roberts.
   Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie, spiritual leader of the
Church of England, visited the injured and said he was impressed
``by their strength and determination that evil will not defeat
them.''
   Runcie said one of the men's main concerns was that their hands
would heal properly so they could continue playing their musical
instruments.
   Police investigating the attack were searching a nearby house
that had been rented briefly by three men with Irish accents.
   ``We know when the men arrived and when they left,'' Cmdr. George
Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad,
said at a news conference. ``It appears the men left several days
before the explosion.''
   He said the house, which overlooks the barracks recreation center
destroyed by the Friday morning blast, was rented by its English
owners to three men for two to three weeks.
   There was no proof the house was an IRA hideout, the commander
said.
   ``By virtue of the fact that the house is very near the base and
the men are Irish, we are very anxious to talk to them,'' he said.
   Explosives experts wearing white protective overalls were
painstakingly examining the house Saturday, and Churchill-Coleman
said they would continue for the next two or three days.
   Police said all 10 men killed during a coffee break between
morning band practices were servicemen. Of 22 men injured, 12
remained hospitalized Saturday, five in serious condition.
   The Irish Republican Army on Friday claimed responsibility for
the explosion, which also severely damaged several nearby houses.
   Police have not determined what caused the blast, but
Churchill-Coleman said, ``It would seem to be some form of
improvised device using high explosives.'' The IRA did not specify
how it caused the blast.



 AP890924-0025 
AP-NR-09-24-89 1336EDT
r i AM-Britain-IRA     09-24 0522
AM-Britain-IRA,0537
Prince Philip Condemns IRA, Clergy Urge Forgiveness
DEAL, Britain (AP) 

   Prince Philip on Sunday condemned the
``senseless'' killing of 10 Royal Marines musicians in an IRA
bombing, and Britain's defense secretary said he warned all
military bases of the risk of similar attacks.
   Clergyman urged relatives and friends of dead and maimed
musicians to forgive the bombers. ``Only forgiveness breaks the tie
between the hater and the hated,'' the Rev. George Lings told
mourners.
   The prince, husband of Queen Elizabeth II and captain general of
the Royal Marines, visited injured men in the hospital and toured
the severely damaged Royal Marines School of Music in Deal,
southeast Britain.
   ``It will not help the IRA win anything,'' said Philip, who wore
a Royal Marines tie. ``It is senseless. One simply wonders what
sort of mentality can even contemplate such meaningless acts. It is
appalling.''
   He paid tribute to the 12 injured men, five of whom were
critically wounded.
   The prince was accompanied by Viscountess Mountbatten, daughter
of Lord Mountbatten, who was killed by an IRA bomb on his boat in
1979. Mountbatten was India's last viceroy and a cousin of the
queen.
   British military installations are a frequent target of the
Irish Republican Army in its campaign to end British rule in
Northern Ireland and unite the predominantly Protestant province
with the Roman Catholic Republic of Ireland.
   Defense Secretary Tom King said Sunday he has issued an alert to
all military installations to prevent other attacks. He would not
give details.
   ``The perpetrators of the latest outrage are at large and there
is a risk of other attacks,'' King said. ``That is why we are
taking a number of other steps.''
   King defended the use of private security firms hired to guard
the Deal school and 29 other ``low-risk'' military installations in
Britain. Local residents and grieving relatives have said security
was lax and should be turned back to the marines. King said the
private firms will remain.
   ``It is important to remember that what we need in these cases
are eyes and ears and observation,'' King said on British
Broadcasting Corp. radio.
   ``Private security guards can be a very useful additional
assistance. They also help to reduce the amount of time soldiers
have to spend on what is not the most enjoyable part of their
activity.''
   At church services throughout the small port, clergymen urged
mourners to pray for and forgive the bombers.
   The Rev. Charles Howard, a Royal Navy chaplain, asked the
300-member congregation inside the barracks, ``if you can find room
in your hearts ... pray for the men who perpetrated this terrible
act, that God will soften their hearts and turn them from their
violent and evil ways.''
   Many cried as Howard read aloud the names of the 10 servicemen
killed during a coffee break between band practices. It was the
worst IRA attack on the British mainland since July 1982.
   At nearby St. George's Church, formerly the Royal Marines'
church, Lings said, ``no one says forgiveness is easy; no one says
the terrorist deserves forgiveness.
   ``But ... forgive them, they not what they do.''



 AP890925-0124 
AP-NR-09-25-89 1627EDT
r i AM-Britain-Blast     09-25 0360
AM-Britain-Blast,0371
Prime Minister Condemns IRA for Music School Explosion
DEAL, England (AP) 

   Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said
Monday the Irish Republican Army members who blew up the Royal
Marines School of Music and killed 10 bandsmen last week are
``monsters'' who will be found and punished.
   ``The young men whom we lost were murdered by common murderers
who must be found and brought to justice and put behind bars for a
very long time,'' she said following a tour of the school's wrecked
barracks in Deal, southeast England.
   ``We lost 10 remarkable musicians, not fighting men, just
because some people try to bomb others out of their democratic
views,'' she said. ``They are very evil people, absolute monsters.''
   Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the legal political arm of
the IRA, issued a statement disputing Mrs. Thatcher's remarks,
saying ``she knows in her heart of hearts the real nature of the
conflict, its cause and the remedy.''
   The IRA is fighting to end British rule in Northern Ireland and
unite the predominantly Protestant province with the Roman Catholic
Republic of Ireland.
   ``We want an end to all violent deaths arising out of the
present relationship between our two countries,'' Adams said. ``We
want a new peaceful relationship based on an acceptance and respect
for our rights as a sovereign nation.''
   After visiting some of the 11 injured bandsmen still in the
hospital, Mrs. Thatcher pledged: ``The hunt for the bombers will be
pursued with all possible speed, vigor and dedication.''
   Raymond Kendall, the secretary-general of the international
police organization Interpol, pledged the organization's full
support in the hunt for those who blew up the school.
   ``I hope we will have a part to play in finding them,'' said
Kendall after opening the International Police Exhibition and
Conference in London.
   ``They are criminals of the worst sort and should be dealt with
as such.''
   Before landing in Deal, Mrs. Thatcher's helicopter flew over the
rubble that had been the band's recreation center.
   The IRA claimed responsibility for the explosion, and police
said they are looking for three men with Irish accents who rented a
house overlooking the barracks.



 LA092389-0092 
 111274 


September 23, 1989, Saturday, Home Edition 




Part 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk 




980 words 




10 KILLED, 22 HURT BY IRA BOMB AT ENGLAND BARRACKS 




By DAN FISHER, Times Staff Writer 




LONDON 




The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for a huge explosion Friday 
that reduced a three-story military barracks on the southeast coast of England 
to rubble, killing 10 people and injuring 22, eight seriously. It would be one 
of the outlawed IRA's deadliest attacks on the main British island. 


Nine marine musicians and one civilian died in the blast, which also damaged 
dozens of nearby homes and could be heard two miles away. The musicians were 
between the ages of 16 and 20 as are most of the recruits in the school. 


A police spokesman said forensic experts are still trying to determine with 
certainty that the explosion was the result of a bomb. But he said the 
characteristics of the blast and a statement claiming responsibility appeared 
to confirm that it was the work of the IRA. 


Security sources said they believe that at least two IRA "active service" 
units, each composed of four or five members, are operating in Britain and 
continental Europe. 


One member, known as the "Jackal" after the assassin in the Frederick Forsyth 
novel "The Day of the Jackal," has been eluding the authorities for two years. 
He has been identified as Patrick Sheehy and has been linked to the IRA's last 
successful mainland bombing attack -- on an army barracks at Mill Hill in 
August, 1988. One soldier was killed in that incident. 


Sheehy and another wanted Irishman, John Conaghty, were linked to an IRA bomb 
factory in North London that the police stumbled upon last December while in 
pursuit of a car thief. A search turned up automatic and semiautomatic weapons, 
ammunition, 150 pounds of Semtex high explosive and a "hit list" of 100 British 
political figures and other officials headed by Prime Minister Margaret 
Thatcher. 


Friday's explosion occurred about 8:30 a.m. in a lounge at the Royal Marines 
School of Music near Deal, on the English Channel in the county of Kent. At the 
school are about 250 recruits who receive military and musical training before 
joining Royal Marines bands. 


The roof of the three-story barracks collapsed, trapping victims beneath the 
rubble. Firefighters used thermal cameras and dogs to search the debris for 
victims and survivors. Heavy lifting gear was brought to the scene from a 
nearby site where a tunnel is being built beneath the English Channel. 


Rescuers shouted for quiet as they used high-technology listening equipment in 
an effort to trace the sound of faint heartbeats. 


"I looked up from the sink and I just saw the whole building explode," Heather 
Hackett, a 26-year-old Deal housewife, told the British Press Assn. She said 
she told her children to run for cover, but as they did, her kitchen window 
shattered. 


"The whole window was blown across the kitchen," Hackett recalled. Her 
2-year-old son, Joshua, was hit by a shard that embedded itself in his back but 
caused no serious injury. 


"I just screamed and ran out of the room," she said. "The bang was so loud I 
thought the whole house was coming in." 




'Appalling Outrage' 


Defense Secretary Tom King visited the scene and called the bombing "an 
appalling outrage committed against unarmed bandsmen -- people who worked for 
charity, who have given great enjoyment to millions right across the country, 
right across the world. 


"The real evil of these murders is that the people who commit them, the 
'godfathers' who send them to commit them, know that they will actually achieve 
nothing. Terrorism is not going to win. We shall find the people responsible 
for this outrage sooner or later, as we have already found some of those 
responsible for the earlier outrages, and they will be brought to justice." 


The authorities have been on high alert, expecting IRA attacks in connection 
with last month's 20th anniversary of the introduction of British troops into 
Northern Ireland. The republican underground organization opposes British rule 
in the predominantly Protestant province and is fighting to join the mainly 
Roman Catholic south in a united, independent Ireland. 




Visit to Ulster 


But in a statement telephoned to a Dublin news agency, Ireland International, 
Friday's attack was linked to Thatcher's visit last week to units of the 
controversial Ulster Defense Regiment in Northern Ireland. 


The locally recruited, overwhelmingly Protestant Ulster Defense Regiment has 
come under fire in connection with an investigation into the leak of secret 
government lists of suspected IRA members to Protestant assassination squads. 
It is widely hated by the Catholic minority in the province, and the Irish 
government in Dublin has urged Britain to disband the force. 


"Mrs. Thatcher visited Ireland with a message of war at a time when we want 
peace," the statement claiming responsibility for the Deal attack said. "Now in 
turn we have visited the Royal Marines in Kent. But we still want peace, and we 
want the British government to leave our country." 


The statement was signed "P. O'Neill, Irish Republican Publicity Bureau," a 
signature that has appeared on earlier IRA bombing claims. 


Friday's attack was the worst on the mainland since the virtually simultaneous 
bombings of July, 1982, directed at ceremonial military units in London's Hyde 
Park and Regent's Park. Eleven bandsmen and mounted guards were killed in those 
incidents. 


Eight persons were killed by IRA car bombs outside Harrods department store 
here in December, 1983, and 21 were killed and 162 injured in two Birmingham 
public house bombings in the fall of 1974. 


An attempted barracks bombing was averted last February when a sentry came upon 
two intruders who had managed to get inside a military camp in Shropshire. 


There has been a series of bomb and automatic rifle attacks this year on 
British soldiers and their families stationed in West Germany. Earlier this 
month an IRA gunman shot to death an army wife, Heidi Hazell, 25, in her car 
near her home at Dortmund. 




Photo, Rescue workers use earth mover to dig through barracks at Royal Marines 
School of Music in frantic effort to locate bomb victims. Associated Press; 
Map, Barracks Blast Site, AP / Los Angeles Times 




IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY; BOMBINGS -- ENGLAND; ENGLAND -- ARMED FORCES; TERRORISM 
-- ENGLAND; ENGLAND -- FOREIGN RELATIONS -- NORTHERN IRELAND; NORTHERN IRELAND 
-- REVOLTS 




 AP880314-0110 
AP-NR-03-14-88 1223EST
r i AM-Yugoslavia-McDonalds     03-14 0243
AM-Yugoslavia-McDonalds,0250
First McDonald's to Open in Communist Country
With AM-Gorbachev, Bjt
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) 

   The communist world gets its first
McDonald's next week, and some people here are wondering whether
its American hamburgers will be as popular as the local fast-food
treat, Pljeskavica.
   The long-awaited opening of the restaurant on one of Belgrade's
main downtown squares will take place March 24, the Yugoslav news
agency Tanjug reported, and it will offer Big Macs, fries and the
other specialities familiar to McDonald's customers in the West.
   The Belgrade media have suggested that the success of the
American restaurant depends on its acceptance by Yugoslavians who
are long accustomed to the hamburger-like Pljeskavica.
   Pljeskavica is made of ground pork and onions, and it is served
on bread and eaten with the hands. It is sold at fast-food
restaurants across the country and costs about a dollar.
   ``In fact, this is a clash between the Big Mac and
Pljeskavica,'' said an official of Genex, Yugoslavia's largest
state-run enterprise that will operate the McDonald's.
   John Onoda, a spokesman at McDonald's Oak Brook, Ill.,
headquarters, said it was the first of the chain's outlets in a
communist country.
   The next East European McDonald's is scheduled to be opened in
Budapest, Hungary, by the end of this year, said Vesna Milosevic,
another Genex official.
   Negotiations have been going on for years for expanding the
fast-food chain to the Soviet Union, but no agreement has been
announced.



 AP880324-0193 
AP-NR-03-24-88 1514EST
u i AM-CommunistMcDonalds Bjt   03-24 0613
AM-Communist McDonalds, Bjt,0630
Police Keep Crowds From Crashing First McDonald's
By DUSAN STOJANOVIC
Associated Press Writer
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) 

   Communism suffered its first Big Mac
attack Thursday as McDonald's opened a restaurant in Yugoslavia,
and police were called in to keep customers who lined up for hours
from getting too unruly under the golden arches.
   ``I just wanted to taste genuine American hamburgers,'' said
Milica Nikolic, a high school student who waited for three hours to
taste her first Big Mac.
   People curiously examined the renovated restaurant's plush
interior and the back-lit signs depicting the hamburgers, french
fries, milk shakes and other fare more familiar in the West. It
also featured amber-colored tables and floors, pastel-colored
upholstery, modern art paintings and discreet illumination.
   The fast-food outlet, located on a downtown square, had drawn
crowds in recent days, and they began gathering long before it
opened Thursday.
   Police kept watch on the lines of customers snaking around the
block, and they regulated the number who came inside to avoid
overcrowding.
   ``No opening of a restaurant in Belgrade has created such a
sensation as this one today,'' one policeman said.
   ``I think this restaurant has no competition in Belgrade,'' said
Milica Danic, a housewife who treated her son to a cheeseburger.
``It is much cleaner, the service is faster, the interior is nicer
and it is not too expensive.''
   The Belgrade media have suggested that the success of McDonald's
in Yugoslavia depends on its acceptance by citizens long accustomed
to a hamburger-like fast-food dish called the Pljeskavica: ground
pork and onions on a bun.
   ``In fact, this is a clash between the Big Mac and
Pljeskavica,'' said Vesna Milosevic, an official of Genex, a
Yugoslav state-run enterprise that has contracted a joint venture
agreement with McDonald's.
   ``Our aim is not to destroy the Pljeskavica on the Yugoslav
market,'' said Predrag Dostanic, managing director of the
Genex-McDonald's. ``We want to change customs of the local people
used to completly different eating habits.''
   He said that lounging at tables for a long time after a finished
meal will draw a warning. Also, smoking is forbidden and alcohol
will not be served.
   This contrasts sharply with the Balkan and Yugoslav custom of
sitting with a drink in smoke-filled restaurants and chatting with
friends after the meal.
   The Big Mac meal, consisting of a hamburger, soft drink and
french fries costs the equivalent of $2.57, or about as much the
similar meal would cost in numerous Pljeskavica joints around town.
   Sadik Seljami, a waiter in a small Pljeskavica outlet just a few
hundred yards from the McDonald's, suggested that the American
restaurant wants to drive Yugoslav fast-food outlets out of
business.
   ``However, we will not give up the fight even if we have to
lower the prices,'' said Seljami.
   Glen Cook, an executive of the McDonald's Corp., said during the
opening ceremonies, ``We are very excited about the opening of this
restaurant, not only because it is the first one in a communist
country, but also because it is one of the nicest in Europe.''
   McDonald's and Genex contribute $1 million each for the flagship
restaurant. They will also share the profits equally even though it
will be managed entirely by Yugoslavs.
   The restaurant has 350 seats and employs 110 people capable of
serving 2,500 meals per hour. In an effort to keep a high level of
services, the management is entitled to fire any employees who fail
to perform.
   The American corporation plans to open five additional
restaurants Yugoslavia in the next five years. The next East
European McDonald's, and the first in a Soviet bloc country, is to
open next month in Budapest, Hungary.



 AP900131-0200 
AP-NR-01-31-90 2051EST
u i AM-Soviet-McDonald's 2ndLd-Writethru a0764 01-31 0748
AM-Soviet-McDonald's, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0764,0767
A Bolshoi Mac Attack in Moscow as First McDonald's Opens
Eds: INSERTS graf after 6th `Big Macs' to ADD official exchange
rates. Pickup 7th `Half the...'
LaserPhotos MOSB4,6
By ANN IMSE
Associated Press Writer
MOSCOW (AP) 

   Thousands of queue-hardened Soviets on Wednesday
cheerfully lined up to get a taste of ``gamburgers,''
``chizburgers'' and ``Filay-o-feesh'' sandwiches as McDonald's
opened in the land of Lenin for the first time.
   The world's largest version of the landmark American fast-food
chain rang up 30,000 meals on 27 cash registers, breaking the
opening-day record for McDonald's worldwide, officials said.
   The Soviets, bundled in fur coats and hats, seemed unfazed,
lining up before dawn outside the 700-seat restaurant, the first of
20 planned across the Soviet Union. The crush of customers was so
intense the company stayed open until midnight, two hours later
than planned.
   ``I only waited an hour and I think they served thousands before
me,'' said a happy middle-aged woman who works at an aluminum plant.
   ``And it was only 10 rubles for all this,'' she said. ``I'm
taking it back for the girls at the factory to try.''
   Big Macs were priced at 3.75 rubles and double cheeseburgers at
3 rubles _ about two hours' pay for a starting McDonald's staffer
or the average Soviet, but much cheaper than other private
restaurants that have sprung up recently.
   The official exchange rate is $1.59 per ruble but foreign
visitors can buy rubles for 16 cents each, about what the currency
is worth on the black market.
   Half the day's sales were donated to the Soviet Children's Fund,
which provides medical care and assistance to orphans and
disadvantaged children, Gary Reinblatt, senior vice president of
McDonald's Canada, said from Toronto.
   The restaurant, built by the company in a joint venture with the
city of Moscow that began 14 years ago, brought to 52 the number of
countries where McDonald's operates.
   The previous opening-day record for sales was in Budapest,
company officials said. Besides its restaurants in the United
States, the leading number of McDonald's are in Canada and Japan,
the officials said.
   Soviets got a first-hand look at such alien concepts as
efficiency and fast, friendly service. Normally dour citizens broke
into grins as they caught the infectious cheerful mood from
youthful Soviet staffers hired for their ability to smile and work
hard.
   Accordions played folk songs and women in traditional costumes
danced with cartoon characters, including Mickey Mouse and Baba
Yaga, a witch of Russian fairy tales.
   One Muscovite, accustomed to clerks who snarl if they say
anything at all, asked for a straw and was startled when a smiling
young Soviet woman found him one and popped it straight into his
drink.
   For most customers, it was their first experience with a
hamburger. Sandwiches were served in the familiar bag marked with
the golden arches, but were packed in wrappers bearing Cyrillic
letters, approximating ``gamburger.''
   They tried them one-handed. They picked their sandwiches apart
to examine the contents. One young woman finally squashed her
``Beeg Mak'' to fit her lips around it.
   ``It tasted great!'' a 14-year-old boy said.
   ``It's a lot different from a stolovaya,'' he continued with a
smile, referring to the much cheaper but run-down dirty cafeterias
that slop rice and fat or boiled sausage.
   Under the sign of the golden arches, accented by the Soviet
hammer-and-sickle flag, hundreds lined up for the long-awaited
grand opening at 10 a.m. on Pushkin Square, reaching out excitedly
for McDonald's flags and pins as the hamburger chain's army
fulfilled the Soviet penchant for souvenirs with Western logos.
   Publicity-conscious managers had the staff shout ``Good morning,
America!'' in English and Russian, for an American TV network.
   McDonald's of Canada Chairman George Cohon, the man behind the
deal, said many people were buying multiple orders and the
restaurant served 15,000 to 20,000 people in just the first five
hours of operation.
   The restaurant limited purchases to 10 Big Macs per customer in
hopes of preventing burger-scalping.
   McDonald's built its own factory, including bakery, dairy,
meat-processing plant and even potato storage yard, to provide its
own guaranteed supplies in a country where up to 25 percent of the
harvest rots en route to the consumer.
   One McDonald's associate said the company wound up importing
wooden crates from Finland for storing potatoes because ``when they
went to build crates, they found there was no wood, and no nails.
They found you need a permit to buy nails.''



 AP901008-0136 
AP-NY-10-08-90 2027EDT
r i AM-China-McDonald's     10-08 0499
AM-China-McDonald's,0614
McDonald's Opens First Restaurant in China
LaserPhoto
By WONG SAU-YING
Associated Press Writer
SHENZHEN, China (AP) 

   McDonald's hamburgers, fries and golden
arches came to China on Monday when the fast-food chain opened its
first restaurant in a nation famed for its distinctive cuisine.
   Hundreds of Chinese waited for hours outside the restaurant in
Shenzhen, an economic boom town near Hong Kong, for their first
taste of a McDonald's hamburger, fries or shake.
   ``I travelled for four hours from a village to get here,'' said
Huang Rongti, 70, who has lost most of her teeth because of age.
``You think hamburgers are too challenging for my age?''
   Later, after purchasing her first Big Mac, she inspected it
carefully before taking a bite.
   ``It tastes good, I like it,'' she announced before slowly
eating the rest.
   The opening of a U.S. fast-food restaurant in China, where
cooking has long been considered a culinary art, may seem odd to
gourmets. It is estimated there are more than 5,000 different
Chinese dishes.
   In Canton, 125 miles northwest of Shenzhen, chefs specialize in
some of the more exotic Chinese dishes, such as cat stew, bear
paws, chicken feet and a famed snake dish - ``Dragon and Tiger
Locked in Battle'' - made from three kinds of poisonous snakes
stewed with leopard meat, and garnished with 20 spices, lemon
leaves and chrysanthemum petals.
   However, many Chinese, who earn an average $32 a month, are
still unable to afford fancy meals at restaurants.
   In Shenzhen, a Chinese special economic zone where foreign
investors have built factories, salaries are higher and workers
earn an average of $53 a month.
   At the restaurant, a Big Mac costs $1.14, a bag of fries 48
cents and a shake 74 cents.
   Another U.S. fast food outlet, Kentucky Fried Chicken, opened a
restaurant in Beijing in 1987, and it now has four outlets there.
McDonald's hopes to open a restaurant in Beijing later.
   Although Kentucky Fried Chicken has become popular, the average
Chinese still regards a meal there as a treat, rather than a
convenience, and McDonald's could face the same problems.
   The 500-seat McDonald's restaurant in a three-story building is
operated by McDonald's Restaurant Shenzhen Ltd., a wholly owned
subsidiary of McDonald's Hong Kong. McDonald's Hong Kong is a 50-50
joint venture with McDonald's in the United States.
   It is managed by a Chinese national, Chen Tikang, and his son,
Chen Yin, who is the restaurant manager. The younger Chen returned
recently from a course at McDonald's hamburger university in Oak
Brook, Ill.
   Most of the ingredients used at the restaurant are now imported
from Hong Kong. But McDonald's executives hope eventually to get
their supplies of beef and potatoes from China.
   Daniel Ng, chairman of McDonald's Restaurant Shenzhen Ltd., said
it took two years to prepare for the restaurant's opening and his
ambition now is to serve 10 million burgers a year.
   Last month, when McDonald's advertized for 240 staffers for the
restaurant, it received applications from more than 9,000 persons,
including college graduates, officials said.
   ``I feel I have a better job prospect working here, and it pays
better,'' said Henry He, 25, who has a master's degree in garment
and textile. He is an assistant manager at the restaurant.
   A waiter at the restaurant can earn 53 cents an hour.
   A factory worker, who waited several hours before she was able
to purchase her hamburger, said she liked it because of its ``sweet
taste'' - the result of tomato ketchup, which is not commonly used
in traditional Chinese cooking.



FT932-5869
_AN-DFBBWAAOFT
930602


FT  02 JUN 93 / Big Macs rake in the roubles


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


AS THE value of the rouble plunges and potential foreign investors worry
about a host of obstacles to investing in Russia, Russian officials had
several reasons yesterday to feel thankful for McDonald's hamburgers.
Opening the second McDonald's restaurant in Moscow, along with a 12-storey
office block, Mr George Cohon, head of McDonald's Canada, could well be
described as the Russian authorities' idea of a model investor.
McDonald's proven determination 'to be here for the long term' and to serve
Russians in their own currency as opposed to the dollars charged by most
other foreign joint ventures are just a couple of reasons for Russian
gratitude.
Mr Viktor Khlystun, the agriculture minister, praised the fact that
McDonald's gets most of its supplies from inside Russia after setting up a
Dollars 45m processing plant outside Moscow.
He also thanked McDonald's for providing jobs, a model of western standards
for the country's decrepit service industry, and finally for what he
described as 'the most delicious food'.
But despite the jolly opening ceremony - with Big Macs, musicians playing
the balalaika, and hundreds of yellow balloons forming a giant M - life has
been tough for McDonald's since it opened its first restaurant in Moscow 3
1/2 years ago.
Although the first Moscow restaurant is the busiest McDonald's in the world
the plunging rouble, high inflation and constantly changing tax rules have
been a challenge to McDonald's management, who admitted that they have no
idea of when it could recoup its initial Dollars 50m investment.
'It will depend on how rapidly we can open new restaurants, what happens to
the rouble, what happens to raw materials that we buy. We don't have an
estimate of how long it will take. There are too many variables,' said Mr
Cohon.
Apart from housing the restaurant on the ground floor, the McDonald's office
block is rented out to western companies in an attempt to generate hard
currency alongside the mountains of roubles made from selling hamburgers.


Companies:-

McDonald's Corp.


Countries:-

RUZ  Russia, East Europe.
    USZ  United States of America.


Industries:-

P5812 Eating Places.


Types:-

RES  Facilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 2



 LA020190-0038 
 169832 


February 1, 1990, Thursday, Home Edition 




Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk 




1057 words 




1ST 'BEEG MAK' ATTACK LEAVES MOSCOW AGOG 




By MASHA HAMILTON, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




MOSCOW 




When the doors swung open Wednesday at the first McDonald's restaurant in the 
Soviet Union, thousands of Muscovites poured in to sip "milk cocktails" and 
taste their first "Beeg Mak Gamburgers," picking them apart to marvel at the 
fixin's. 


Some expressed wonder at the speedy service -- "only an hour in line" -- while 
others heralded the event as the first evidence that President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev's economic reforms are finally filtering down to the average 
Muscovite. 


Although cynics might complain of the steady homogenizing of world cultures, 
the arrival of the fast-food chain here -- 14 years after a Canadian McDonald's 
official broached the idea with Soviet officials at the 1976 Montreal Olympics 
-- was without doubt a major event. 


Most customers seemed thrilled to be part of it, even though some of them gave 
the Big Mac sandwich a mixed review. 


"It tasted very, I would say, unusual," Lubov Sereda, 45, said with a smile. 
"Everything was very soft and mild." 


"But those strawberry milk cocktails, well. . . ," her husband put in, flashing 
a thumbs-up sign. 


"It was very interesting, that gamburger," Zvetlana Generotova, 25, said, 
leaving with a large paper bag filled with take-out food, also a new concept 
here. "I certainly want my family to try it, at least once." 


Russians say "gamburger" because they pronounce Western words that begin with 
"h" as though they begin with "g." 


Another customer, Victor Kunyasev, said: "Well, my wife makes better food. But 
it was nice, a good place to take a break and grab a bite to eat." 


Some reported waiting up to 1 hour and 45 minutes to be served, but most did 
not seem to mind. In honor of the grand opening, a brigade of workers 
distributed McDonald's flags and pins; entertainers performed on the accordion 
and sang folk songs under golden arches adorned with the Soviet hammer and 
sickle. 


The world's largest McDonald's, with 27 cash registers and a seating capacity 
of 900, brings to Moscow not only hamburgers, french fries and shakes (called 
"milk cocktails" here), but also a living lesson in Western-style marketing. 


At training sessions before opening day, cashiers were taught the importance of 
greeting customers cheerfully, of saying "please" and "thank you" -- all of 
which promises something distinctly different from the typically surly service 
at most of Moscow's dingy state cafes. 


"This is very different from anything I've ever done before," cashier Larissa 
Lebedeva said. Lebedeva, 25, who formerly worked as deputy director of a small 
food store, said that "to be this polite and to have everything this clean is 
new for the workers as well as for the customers." 


Sam Yahel, from McDonald's in Atlanta, who helped train the 630 Soviet workers, 
said the Soviet trainees were at a disadvantage because in most other parts of 
the world, new workers had at least eaten at one of the restaurants. 


Most of the Soviet workers had never tasted a Western-style hamburger. They 
practiced cooking using yellow cardboard squares in place of cheese and 
different colored poker chips in place of onions, tomatoes and pickles. 


"The Soviet Union is definitely a different world," Yahel said. "Our food and 
our standards -- it's all new. For example, we had to teach our employees that 
when there were still crumbs on the counter, it needed to be wiped off again." 


While most of the Soviet workers trained for a matter of days, the four Soviet 
managers of the restaurant spent nine months abroad learning their jobs. They 
graduated from the Canadian Institute of Hamburgerology. 


The Moscow McDonald's will be open for 12 hours a day beginning at 10 a.m. and 
will be able, they say, to serve more than 15,000 customers a day. 


On Wednesday, though, it stayed open an extra two hours and served a McDonald's 
record 30,000 meals. The previous record for opening-day transactions was 9,100 
in Budapest, Hungary, and the previous record sales for a single day was 14,000 
in Hong Kong. 


There is a brass plaque near the entrance that announces, "Soviet Rubles Only." 
Virtually every other foreign firm that has come into the Soviet Union in 
recent years accepts only hard currencies, meaning that it caters primarily to 
foreigners. 


The McDonald's prices are high compared to the state restaurants, where a large 
meal seldom costs more than a ruble. The Big Mac costs 3.75 rubles, or about $5 
at the official exchange rate, and dinner out for the family can come to two 
days' wages for the average Soviet worker. 


McDonald's employees are paid 1.50 rubles an hour, with a chance for an 
increase of up to 50 kopecks in three months' time. The staff was chosen from 
25,000 applicants. 


Canadian and American officials who have helped train the Soviet personnel know 
that the allure of working for a Western firm was a drawing factor, but they 
nonetheless expect a 20% turnover rate, twice their normal average. 


McDonald's invested $50 million in setting up the restaurant and a food 
processing plant in a Moscow suburb that turns out everything from meat patties 
to sesame-seed buns. Soviet farmers, who are supplying most of the products, 
have been given special training and disease-resistant seed for potatoes and 
cucumbers. 


The extra effort was necessary to guarantee supplies in a country where as much 
as 25% of the harvest spoils on the way to the consumer. 


Despite all of the planning, some shortages still affect the operation. Coffee 
is not on the menu, for example, because supplies cannot be guaranteed. 


The joint venture agreement between McDonald's of Canada and the Moscow City 
Council calls for 20 restaurants, though there is no timetable or even a 
definite plan for when or where the second McDonald's will open. 


Is there any fear that when the golden arches become as common as the cupolas 
of Russian Orthodox churches, it will be a sign that capitalism is making real 
inroads in the Communist capital? McDonald's officials say it is not a question 
that worries them or their Soviet counterparts. 


"There weren't many ideological discussions during these negotiations," said 
Marc Winer, 43, a native of Nashua, N.H., who is general director of the Moscow 
outlet. "The Soviets understood that the food was going to move very 
efficiently from the field to the mouth. That is more important to them right 
now than almost anything else." 




Photo, COLOR, Crowd gathers for opening of first McDonald's in Soviet Union, 
where some waited an hour for fast food. Agence France-Presse; Photo, Soviet 
police officer, woman and two youngsters chow down at Moscow's giant new 
McDonald's, near City Hall. With seats for 900 and 27 cash registers, it served 
30,000 people on opening day. Associated Press; Reuters; Map, Moscow 
McDonald's, AP / Los Angeles Times 




FAST FOOD INDUSTRY -- USSR; MCDONALD'S RESTAURANTS OF CANADA LTD; CANADA -- 
FOREIGN INVESTMENTS -- USSR; JOINT VENTURES; OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING; USSR -- 
LABOR; CUSTOMER SERVICE; USSR -- CULTURE 




 WSJ880412-0015 
 McDonald's Outlet In Korea to Target New Middle Class 
 Joseph P. Manguno (WSJ Staff) 
 
 FREST MCD 
 RFD 
 SEOUL  

   Two corporate executives sat down in an office here last month to talk business with a bunch of clowns. 

   The subject was no laughing matter, but rather the serious endeavor of finding South Korea's Ronald McDonald. 
Seven years after the U.S. hamburger giant first tried to bring its Big Macs to South Korea, the golden arches were finally going up. 
McAhn Industries Ltd. recently opened the first of what it expects will be a string of burger outlets in Seoul. 
The company is a 50-50 joint venture of McDonald's Corp., Oak Brook, Ill., and an accountant-turned-entrepreneur, Ahn Hyo Young. 

   McDonald's is flourishing in 11 other nations in the region. 
But its entry into South Korea, which has Asia's fastest-growing economy, had been frustrated by its inability to find a suitable partner and to win agreement from Seoul on terms. 

   South Korea may be one of McDonald's most promising foreign markets, business analysts say. 
The country is developing an essential ingredient for the success of a fast-food enterprise: a middle class. 

   Hamburger-related fast-food sales in South Korea totaled $87.5 million last year, a 30% rise from 1986, according to the Ministry of Finance. 
Analysts say this year's rise could be much bigger, helped by a 25% increase in wages in mid-1987 and another big pay increase expected soon. 

   The business is likely to profit from the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul in September, and from an anticipated post-Olympic economic boom here. 

   However, the competition is heating up, and there is "a good possibility that South Korea already has reached the fast-food saturation point for its current average income bracket," an official for the South Korea Chamber of Commerce and Industry says. 
The competition, besides Wendy's International's 11 shops and six of Burger King, a unit of Pillsbury Co., includes home-grown burger chains. 

   McDonald's strategy is to take things slowly, avoiding extravagances, Mr. Ahn and Awad Sifri, McDonald's marketing director, say. 
"We are starting small," says Mr. Ahn. 
"We're hoping to open three outlets this year and five next year. 
After that, we'd like to open five every year." 

   Equally modest, he says, will be the initial menu: no breakfast, no Chicken McNuggets and no products tailored to national tastes, as offered elsewhere. 

   The venture is rejecting television commercials in favor of a cheaper, more oldfashioned approach: a brief advertising campaign in newspapers, distribution of fliers and word of mouth. 

   Mr. Sifri says the emphasis will be on developing McDonald's image as an affordable place for the emerging middle class, rather than as a familiar name for foreigners in South Korea. 
Attention will be given to attracting children, he adds. 

   Mr. Ahn says McDonald's talked to 16 potential partners before choosing the Harvard-trained accountant in 1984. 
Two years later, McDonald's and Mr. Ahn each put up $1 million in capital and borrowed an additional $4 million to form McAhn. 

   McDonald's struggled with the government over McAhn's royalty payments to the U.S. partner -- the issue was resolved -- and over tight import restrictions on food products. 
The import question "came down to finding a supplier locally who could supply high-quality beef and potatoes at a value," McDonald's said. 

   Even McDonald's golden arches symbol ran into red tape, since the city regulates the size and color of signs. 
"It may be against the law, but we're putting them up anyway," Mr. Ahn says. 




 AP880817-0040 
AP-NR-08-17-88 0409EDT
r p PM-CVN--QuayleFamily     08-17 0577
PM-CVN--Quayle Family,580
Quayle Called A Dedicated Family Man
By DOUG RICHARDSON
Associated Press Writer
NEW ORLEANS (AP) 

   Dan Quayle's sister believes the Indiana
senator won't let his candidacy for vice president hurt the family
life he and his wife, Marilyn, enjoy.
   ``I don't think it will be tough on the family,'' said Martha
Saddler, Quayle's sister, who lives in Huntington, Ind. ``Since
he's been in politics, we all kind of shake our heads at his hectic
schedule and wonder how he does it. But he does it and loves it.''
   The Quayle family and friends were celebrating Tuesday afternoon
after George Bush announced he wants the 41-year-old Indiana
senator to be the Republican nominee for vice president.
   Those who have known the Quayles for years said the senator and
his wife have remained relatively unchanged by their years in
public life.
   Dan and Marilyn Quayle met as law students in Indianapolis,
married while they were still in school and remain close to many of
their friends from that period.
   ``One of the greatest things about him is the job of being a
senator has not changed him a bit,'' said Indianapolis attorney
William R. Neale, treasurer of Quayle's 1986 re-election campaign.
``He's the same nice guy he was in law school.''
   Neale, who grew up with Marilyn Tucker Quayle in Indianapolis,
introduced Dan Quayle to his future wife at a student gathering at
the Indiana University law school in the early 1970s.
   Dan Quayle, who grew up in Huntington, graduated from DePauw
University, a small liberal arts college in Greencastle, Ind.,
before going to work in the Indiana attorney general's office in
1970.
   Daniel F. Evans, also a law school classmate of Dan Quayle, said
he doesn't expect Quayle's national candidacy to change him.
   ``I think his strength is he'll remember who his friends are
even after this,'' said Evans, who was chairman of Quayle's 1986
campaign.
   Friends said the Quayles are devoted to their three children and
prefer quiet nights at home to nights out on the town in Washington.
   ``His family looks like the family both parties are trying to
appeal to,'' said Mitch Daniels, former political chief in the
White House and now president of the Hudson Institute. ``It's a
beautiful family. I think they'll be a real asset.''
   The couple, who married in 1972, have a 14-year-old son, Tucker;
a 12-year-old son, Benjamin; and a 9-year-old daughter, Corinne.
   When they campaign in Indiana, the Quayles often tour in two
groups _ the boys riding in parades with Marilyn Quayle and Corinne
and her father visiting county fairs.
   ``The kids are nonchalant, normal kids,'' said Mrs. Saddler.
``They take it in stride and play.''
   In an interview with Indiana reporters Monday, the Quayles said
they had worried during the vice presidential speculation about the
family's loss of privacy during a national campaign.
   ``The total lack of privacy is going to be the biggest minus,''
said Mrs. Quayle, 39.
   Quayle said he had questioned each of his children about whether
he should accept the vice presidential spot if Bush offered it.
   Tucker was fascinated by the idea, Quayle said. Benjamin was
ambiguous but he thought Secret Service agents might be able to
help him on tests at school, Mrs. Quayle said.
   Corinne didn't like the prospect of having her father spend more
time away from home, Quayle said.
   ``She told me, `Daddy, I really hope George Bush picks Bob
Dole,''' said Quayle.



 AP880818-0023 
AP-NR-08-18-88 0355EDT
r p PM-CVN--QuayletheLegend     08-18 0452
PM-CVN--Quayle the Legend,440
Republicans Quickly Elevate Quayle Into The American Pantheon
By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL
Associated Press Writer
NEW ORLEANS (AP) 

   Dan Quayle has not yet been nominated for
vice president and already Republicans are comparing him to Thomas
Jefferson and John F. Kennedy.
   Sen. John Warner of Virginia, who served with Quayle on a Senate
subcommittee, told an audience that whenever he heard the Indiana
senator speak, ``I'd say, `there stands the next Thomas
Jefferson.'''
   And, added Warner, ``he does have the same fire in his belly as
our great forefather Thomas Jefferson of Virginia.''
   Former president Gerald Ford made the comparison with Kennedy, a
Democrat.
   ``In 1960, the American people voted for John F. Kennedy for
president and he was the relatively same age as Dan Quayle,'' said
Ford. ``John Kennedy had been in the House and Senate 14 years
before he was elected president and Dan Quayle's had 12 years.''
   What Quayle thinks of those references isn't known. But he
doesn't like it when people say he looks like movie idol Robert
Redford.
   Whether, indeed, he looks like Redford seems to be in the eye of
the beholder. In the parlance of politics, it's an issue. They are
both male. They are both blond.
   The so-called resemblance became a point of contention in the
1980 Senate race and Redford took umbrage. The actor, who once
played the role of a presidential office seeker in ``The
Candidate'' sent Quayle a telegram telling him to stop the
look-alike references in his congressional campaign literature.
   Quayle said the news media had made the comparison, not he, and
after he was elected sent Redford an autographed picture of himself.
   And this week, he told reporters he considered the so-called
Redford look ``a stigma.'' He wasn't asked how he felt about being
painted as another Jefferson or Kennedy.
   Meanwhile, fellow senators were trying to publicize Quayle who,
at 41, hasn't had a chance to become a legend. He is a Republican
vice presidential candidate who is not, as Spiro Agnew once said of
himself, a household word.
   To help him get known, eight fellow senators Wednesday took
turns telling reporters how much they liked him.
   ``We know him well,'' said Strom Thurmond, R-S.C.
   ``He's attractive because of his looks, he's attractive because
of his enthusiasm,'' said Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz.
   ``I think Dan Quayle, although he's 41 years of age, he's going
to send a message to the American people that the Republican Party
respects young people who achieve,'' said Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M.
   Oh, yes, he's also rich, but the senators said that should not
hold him back.
   ``Let's not start this business of who's wealthy,'' Sen. Alfonse
D'Amato, R-N.Y.



 AP880818-0226 
AP-NR-08-18-88 2113EDT
u p BC-CVN--DoleText     08-18 0516
BC-CVN--Dole Text,530
NEW ORLEANS (AP) 

   Here is a transcript of the speech by Sen.
Bob Dole of Kansas nominating Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana for vice
president at the Republican National Convention on Thursday night.
   Thank you. Thank you.
   Mr. Chairman, four of my congressional colleagues and I are here
for the purpose of nominating the next vice president of the United
States.
   We are here to nominate one of the bright young lights in the
Republican Party, a man I am proud to say is my colleague, the
junior senator from Indiana, Dan Quayle.
   You know, senators get a lot of mail. Party leaders more than
most. And almost every one of these letters asks for help with some
problem.
   Well, three years ago, I received a handwritten plea from a
6-year-old girl who after several days of long, long Senate
sessions had a very special problem.
   She wrote, and I quote: ``I have my second-grade play tonight.
Please make sure my daddy can come home and watch me.''
   I knew Corinne Quayle was from a political family because she
invited me to come along, too.
   Corinne and her brothers, Tucker and Benjamin, and their mother,
Marilyn, share Dan Quayle with the people of Indiana and the United
States Senate.
   Dan Quayle is a dedicated public servant and a devoted family
man.
   And whenever I needed him, whenever I needed him, Dan was there
_ ready and willing to make the tough choices, to cast the tough
votes, to transform President Reagan's vision of America into the
law of the land.
   Whether it was the budget or defense, tax reform or the INF
treaty, Dan Quayle was there, a forceful advocate, and a staunch
supporter of the Reagan revolution. And now he is ready to carry
that revolution forward.
   And believe me he is ready, and just let the Democrats try to
use experience as a measuring stick in this campaign. Just let them
try.
   Now, I don't mean to suggest their presidential candidate lacks
experience. He's got plenty of experience, plenty of experience _
experience in raising taxes again and again, experience in vetoing
the pledge of allegiance in public schools, experience in
increasing spending year after year after year in Massachusetts.
   And I just don't believe the American people want that kind of
experience in the White House.
   It sounds like a Dukak-eyed idea to me.
   But Dan Quayle's got experience, too. He's already spent 12
years as a congressman and a senator, tackling the vital national
and international issues that affect the lives of all Americans and
the future of our country.
   That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael
Dukakis _ and he is running for president.
   As I said at the start, Dan Quayle is a man I know and trust. I
am honored to nominate him for vice president, Mr. Chairman.
   And for the purpose of debate only, I yield the balance of my
time to the outstanding, distinguished senior from Indiana, my good
friend, Sen. Dick Lugar.

End Dole Text _ 1 Take


 AP880819-0023 
AP-NR-08-19-88 0247EDT
r p PM-CVN--Quayle Bjt   08-19 0588
PM-CVN--Quayle, Bjt,560
Quayle's Triumph Quickly Tarnished
By EILEEN PUTMAN
Associated Press Writer
NEW ORLEANS (AP) 

   Dan Quayle's vice presidential nomination was
supposed to be a triumph for the precocious young Indiana senator,
but the dream faded overnight.
   Bush's surprise choice for his running mate was supposed to
ignite a campaign that has seemed at times to suffer from lack of
inspiration, but he quickly encountered questions over his military
record and suggestions he could best serve the Republicans by
withdrawing from the ticket.
   Though he found himself in danger of fizzling Thursday, Quayle
managed to stir the convention hall with his upbeat speech about
family, generations and the rosy future he foresaw under a Bush
administration.
   ``Let's go on to victory!'' Quayle exhorted, as the crowd
erupted in cheers.
   The 41-year-old nominee delivered the speech with calm
self-assurance, sticking close to his text and avoiding his
penchant for extemporaneous remarks _ perhaps another result of the
unanticipated controversy.
   Bush, who followed his running mate to the podium, said he was
``proud to have Dan Quayle at my side.'' The two will stress the
unity of their ticket as they campaign together this weekend
through Indiana, Ohio and Illinois.
   But beyond the optimistic words was an unsettling undercurrent
that threatened Quayle's candidacy just as it was launched.
   Retired Maj. Gen. Wendell C. Phillippi _ who worked for Quayle's
grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam, as managing editor of The
Indianapolis News _ said he contacted the National Guard on behalf
of Quayle when the young man applied in 1969 and ``recommended him
very highly,'' the News reported.
   Quayle, a hardliner on defense matters, has said he sought guard
duty so he could attend law school. A Bush aide said the matter was
discussed with the Indiana senator during the process that led to
his selection for the Bush ticket, and Quayle had denied that he
used influence to gain admittance to the Guard.
   Bush aides said no thought had been given to dropping Quayle
from the ticket, as some Republicans suggested. Quayle was tense
and refused to answer reporters' questions about the topic during a
brief walk-through at the convention hall.
   It was a daunting change for the senator, whose youthful vigor,
rapid political rise, striking good looks and wealth have been
compared to those of John F. Kennedy.
   Quayle alluded to the National Guard issue during his speech,
saying he was proud of the six years he served. He also addressed
his relative anonymity: ``Many this week have asked, `Who is Dan
Quayle?' The people of Indiana know me and now the nation will.''
   Those who addressed the convention on his behalf also pulled out
their ammunition. Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas, who placed Quayle's name
in nomination, stressed his campaign skills and sought to deflect
concerns that he lacked experience for the job.
   ``He's already spent 12 years as a congressman and senator. ...
That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael Dukakis,
and he is running for president,'' Dole said.
   Sen. Alan Simpson of Wyoming, one of those who seconded the
nomination, said Quayle would ``bring vim, vigor and vitality'' to
the party and would bring ``sparks and voltage to this campaign.''
   Whether Quayle can overcome his difficult start on the national
ticket remains to be seen. Others, notably Democratic vice
presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro in 1984, found they could
not.
   But Quayle, ever upbeat, was determined Thursday night not to be
daunted by the prospect. ``Miracles do happen,'' he told his party.



 AP880826-0226 
AP-NR-08-26-88 2049EDT
u p AM-Quayle-Resume 2ndLd-Writethru a0678 08-26 0586
AM-Quayle-Resume, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0678,560
Quayle's Biography Inflates State Job; Quayle Concedes Error
Eds: INSERTS 1 graf after 14th graf pvs, bgng: ``Theodore Sendak
...'' to UPDATE with statement from former assistant attorney
general.
By ROBERT DVORCHAK
AP National Writer
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) 

   Republican vice presidential candidate Dan
Quayle's official resume says he was the Indiana Consumer
Protection Division's chief investigator a year before the unit was
created, state records show.
   The law creating the unit passed April 14, 1971, and took effect
July 1. Officials said Quayle served as chief investigator from
July until mid-September, when he became administrative assistant
to then-Gov. Edgar D. Whitcomb.
   Quayle's Senate biography, which his campaign is using as his
official background, says he was chief investigator of the unit in
the Attorney General's office from 1970 to 1971.
   ``He was assigned to our section in the spring of 1971,'' said
Robert Smith, the unit's first director and now an attorney in
Indianapolis.
   ``He was in fact the chief investigator. He helped get the unit
set up. (But) it would not have been before 1971,'' Smith said
Friday in a telephone interview. ``We formally began operations
July 1.''
   Quayle conceded Friday that the resume entry was ``inaccurate''
and said his staff had written the document.
   ``If it indicated that, that is inaccurate. I didn't hold that
job for two years,'' Quayle told reporters aboard his campaign
plane.
   Earlier, however, Quayle spokesman David Prosperi called the
revelation of the error by The Plain Dealer of Cleveland ``a cheap
shot.''
   Quayle was hired as an entry-level research assistant by the
state Attorney General's office in 1970 after he returned from six
months of basic and advanced training for the Indiana National
Guard.
   Quayle, a 1969 graduate of DePauw University, was attending
Indiana University Law School at the time.
   M. Stanton Evans, then an editor with the Indianapolis News,
helped arrange his job interview with the state. Evans worked for
Eugene C. Pulliam, Quayle's grandfather and publisher of the News.
   ``At no point in any of this did Dan Quayle ask any favors or
use any influence,'' said Evans, now with the National Journalism
Center in Washington, D.C.
   ``He wouldn't have been hired as a chief investigator. He was
hired in an entry-level job and was promoted to a whole bunch of
jobs on his merits. It's a nothing story,'' Evans said.
   Theodore Sendak, the Attorney General at the time, recently had
surgery and is unable to comment, according to his son, Timothy
Sendak.
   Patricia Gifford, a Marion Superior Court judge who was then an
assistant attorney general, said Friday that prior to the
establishment of the Consumer Protection Division, ``all complaints
and inquiries were handled by me. The legal assistant assigned to
me and utilized as my chief investigator was Dan Quayle.'' Her
statement was released by the Quayle campaign.
   The Consumer Protection Division was created by the state
legislature to resolve complaints over defective products, false
claims in ads, faulty speedometer readings and mail-order fraud.
   In 1980, Quayle referred to himself as a ``Vietnam-era veteran''
in campaign literature when he was running against three-term
incumbent Birch Bayh in a Senate race.
   Quayle, who enlisted in the Indiana National Guard, dropped the
reference after objections by some Vietnam combat veterans.
   In that same election, which he won, Quayle said he was ``on
active duty for several periods during his tenure'' in the Guard.
The statement referred to periods when Quayle was in basic training
and 15 days of camp each summer.



 AP881114-0006 
AP-NR-11-14-88 0127EST
r w PM-QuayleAsVeep Bjt   11-14 0979
PM-Quayle As Veep, Bjt,970
Quayle Likely To Be Odd Man Out In Bush White House, Pundits Say
By EILEEN PUTMAN
Associated Press Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   Dan Quayle is likely to be a ``man on the
outside'' in George Bush's White House following a vice presidential
candidacy that began in a furor but settled into obscurity, experts
say.
   Encumbered by his image as a political novice who needed a bevy
of professional handlers to survive early campaign controversies,
Quayle enters a Bush administration in which he has few intimates or
allies.
   Relegated in the campaign to small towns and safe GOP areas,
Quayle as vice president is likely to be given a traditional
ceremonial role _ going to political gatherings and state funerals _
rather than the advisory role that Walter Mondale and even Bush had,
some scholars feel.
   ``Dan Quayle is going to set the vice presidency back about a
decade or more. One thing that political scientists have been
talking about is just how much the vice presidency has grown. ...
With Quayle, it's just going to retreat to the old days of politics
and funerals,'' said Ryan Barilleaux, a professor of political
science at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, who studies the
American presidency.
   Bush rarely mentioned his 41-year-old running mate during the
campaign. When asked, Bush employed the stock lines that Quayle
would ``make an outstanding vice president'' and had been ``tempered
by steel'' as he weathered the early furor over his military
service, academic record and personal life.
   The president-elect told reporters Quayle would have access to
the same papers, information and intelligence that is available to
the president. But he would go no further in describing what
assignments he would give Quayle.
   Quayle says Bush has talked to him about heading a space council,
and that he assumes he'll have a role in the administration's
anti-drug efforts. ``I will be a very close adviser to the
president,'' Quayle said.
   But that's not the way everyone sees it.
   Both Bush and Mondale came to their vice presidential campaigns
with substantial reputations and were able to place key staffers in
important positions in the respective presidential campaigns,
Barilleaux notes.
   ``Dan Quayle has contributed nothing in the way of staff to the
Bush campaign. He doesn't have his own big reputation on Capitol
Hill. ... Dan Quayle has no friends in a Bush White House except
George Bush,'' Barilleaux says.
   ``They're going to give him a lot of window dressing, a space
council, drug task force, but he's going to be a man on the outside
... not a man who's going to be consulted in a crisis, except on a
pro forma basis.''
   But Eddie Mahe Jr., a GOP consultant who worked with the Bush
campaign, says Bush is likely to give Quayle a more active role in
the administration than he had in the campaign.
   ``Vindication demands that. Both of them will want to prove how
right the decision was,'' Mahe says.
   Democrats portrayed Quayle during the campaign as a lightweight,
a man with little or no legislative accomplishments, untested and
unqualified to be a heartbeat away from the presidency. Even some
members of Quayle's own party were dismayed at Bush's choice.
   Quayle didn't help his case by making a number of celebrated
gaffes during the campaign, perhaps the worst being his garbled
explanation of the Holocaust and his declaration, ``I didn't live in
this century.''
   Norman Ornstein, of the American Enterprise Institute, says
Quayle, while ``not the world's leading intellectual,'' is not ``a
complete dummy.'' He was simply thrust into a situation for which he
was unprepared, Ornstein says.
   ``I think he's immature. He's not stupid,'' Ornstein says.
   But Quayle comes to the White House with ``a very damaging
stereotype that's developed about him that's widely believed in the
political community and that's believed by a large segment of the
electorate,'' Ornstein says.
   ``That's going to give him a good deal to overcome. It's going to
give him an enormous impetus to prove himself. That's going to be
difficult, given the office.''
   Both Barilleaux and Stephen Hess of the Brookings Institution see
parallels in Quayle's vice presidency and those of Richard Nixon and
Spiro Agnew. The choice of Nixon was viewed as a move by Dwight
Eisenhower to appease the party's right wing, and Agnew was seen as
a political nonentity.
   ``The natural response is to use him (Quayle) sparingly, as Nixon
did with Agnew in 1968,'' Hess says. ``However, Quayle has four
years to prove himself, and I think you're going to see stories in
two years about how much he's learned, how much he's acted
responsibly, how far he's come from the campaign of 1988.''
   Quayle admits the campaign was a learning process. After the
controversies subsided, Quayle declared his independence from his
Bush handlers, saying he would be his own man. He became more
accessible to the media but continued to adhere to the schedule
handed down from Washington and to deliver the party's scripted
message. Soon, he dropped off the front pages.
   And although he occasionally spoke out in frustration at having
little control over his schedule and at ceasing to make national
news, he played the role of loyal No. 2 and even trumpeted his new
anonymity.
   ``We have arrived as being a traditional vice presidential
nominee because we are either on the back pages or either not on the
pages at all. That's what we're supposed to be,'' he told reporters.
   That willingness to be a team player could serve him well in a
Bush White House, Mahe feels, since Bush wants ``a private adviser,
whose experience and opinion he respected ... (who) has never had
another agenda.''
   ``Dan Quayle owes his political life to one man and one man
alone,'' Mahe says. ``You're never going to see Dan Quayle telling
tales out of school.''



 LA111289-0035 
 133531 


November 12, 1989, Sunday, Home Edition 




View; Part E; Page 1; Column 4; View Desk 




879 words 




ROGER SIMON: A STRATEGY THAT BEARS REPEATING 




By ROGER SIMON 




One year after his election, Dan Quayle has achieved all he ever wanted: He has 
become dull. 


His coming-out party last Sunday was a true test of his new ability to not make 
news. He went on "Meet the Press." 


This was no small thing. During his entire campaign for the vice presidency, 
Quayle refused all requests from such national interview shows. He didn't 
appear on "Meet the Press" or "This Week With David Brinkley" or "Face the 
Nation." 


And he didn't do so because back then he was making too much news. His every 
slip, his every gaffe, his every goof was news. 


He was the stuff of nightly TV monologues. "A lot of people feel Quayle is just 
too inexperienced for a do-nothing job," Jay Leno once said. 


That joke was not only funny, but it got to the heart of a strange phenomenon: 
Americans didn't give a damn about the vice presidency (Mike Dukakis tried to 
make Quayle a major issue and failed), but some also felt that Quayle wasn't 
qualified for a job that had no qualifications. 


So when Quayle got to Washington, he got there with one goal: Support the 
President and make himself a very small target. Stay out of the headlines and 
give no reason for anyone to dump him in 1992. 


"We had asked him on the show a number of times," Christie Basham, senior 
producer of "Meet the Press" told me, "but he always declined. We renewed our 
request and then after saying he would not do the show, he changed his mind and 
said he would. It was the 42nd anniversary of the show and we wanted someone 
above and beyond the usual guest." 


And it says something about Dan Quayle's reputation that he would be considered 
"above and beyond" the usual guest. Normally, a vice president would not be. 
That's because vice presidents don't actually do anything. They don't run 
departments or make policy. They mostly wait for heads of state to expire. As 
George Bush once joked about his duties as vice president: "You die; I fly." 


But Quayle was considered a hot TV guest because he might screw up. He might 
make a mistake or say something outrageous or disagree with the President. 


None of this happened. The show was uneventful. Quayle answered all the 
questions put to him and he made little if any news. Some major newspapers 
didn't even bother to do a story the next day. 


It was everything Quayle had hoped for. 


I asked David Beckwith, his spokesman, why Quayle had waited so long to go on a 
major interview show. 


"Well, he wanted to concentrate on the more important part of the job," 
Beckwith said. "He wanted to solidify his relationship with the President and 
learn the inner workings of the administration." 


So why go on now? 


"It seemed like a particularly opportune week," Beckwith said. George Bush and 
Mikhail Gorbachev had announced a summit. Central America was back in the news. 
And, oh yeah, Bush had said Dan Quayle would be on the ticket in 1992. 


"And Marlin (Fitzwater, Bush's spokesman) called and just suggested we do the 
show," Beckwith said. 


The selection of Dan Quayle had been Bush's first major (and some would say 
only) decision of his presidential campaign. He had input from a number of 
people, but Quayle was George Bush's choice. 


Many thought it was a terrible choice, but there is nothing like a victory to 
give everything a rosy glow. And Bush's announcement that Quayle would be his 
running mate again was Bush's way of saying: "I didn't screw up the first time. 
I made a decision and it was the right decision and just to show you how right 
it was, I am making it again." 


And now was the time for Quayle to go on "Meet the Press" and show everybody 
just how right George Bush had been. 


I asked Beckwith if Quayle had been pleased by how the show had gone. 


"He was especially pleased with the seriousness of the questions," Beckwith 
said. "A lot of the time, you never know what you're going to get into. 
Sometimes the questions can be not particularly serious." 


A typical example of a "non-serious" question often put to Dan Quayle is: "Why 
does everyone say your wife is smarter than you?" 


But Quayle got no questions like that last week. I asked Christie Basham of 
"Meet the Press" if Quayle had asked in advance who the questioners would be. 
"Yes," Basham said, "but almost all the guests do." 


Quayle's questioners were David Broder of the Washington Post and Elizabeth 
Drew of the New Yorker, both of whom stuck to serious questions. (If Quayle had 
been told the questioners were going to be Hunter Thompson and Jimmy Breslin, I 
have a feeling Quayle might have come down with laryngitis.) 


After the show, Fitzwater called Quayle to express his, and presumably the 
President's, pleasure at how Quayle had handled himself. 


Quayle had said very little and he had said it very well. 


"The very limitations of a vice president's role don't make him an ideal 
guest," Beckwith admitted. "Almost by job description, a vice president is not 
permitted to make serious news." 


And Quayle knows his future is in sticking to that. During the 1988 campaign, I 
interviewed Quayle and I came away with one overwhelming impression: Dan Quayle 
would run for President in 1996. 


And he will do so, I believe, by being a vice president who keeps his head 
down, his nose clean and his life dull. 


After all, it worked for George Bush. 




Column 




 SJMN91-06140099 
 06140099 
  Photos (2); PHOTO: David Schenkel, who coordinated the Premiere Dan Quayle
Memorabilia Exhibit in Huntington, Ind., holds a sweat shirt the vice
president wore to play basketball as a boy.; PHOTO: New York Times; New York
Times; Marj Hiner of Huntington, Ind., and her mom, Dottie Watson, tote a
cardboard Quayle  
  US; VICE-PRESIDENT; CITY; INDIANA; REACTION  
  PEOPLE in this picture-postcard town of Victorian houses and clean streets
don't care what Jay Leno or the polls or the Democrats or disgruntled
Republicans have been saying about Dan Quayle.;    Despite the fact that
President Bush's health problems have made the vice president a national
preoccupation, to people here he's just Danny Quayle from Polk Street -- a
really nice guy from a really nice family that runs the local newspaper.  
  Living  
  QUAYLE'S HOMETOWN FLUSHED WITH PRIDE  
  Cover Story  
     He is the most important person ever to come out of this town, and even as
the world considers his fitness for the presidency, Huntington is celebrating
his life in what is ambitiously being billed as the Premiere Dan Quayle
Memorabilia Exhibit.;    To those who say Quayle does not merit his own
exhibition, Quayle devotees say with a mixture of defiance and dignity that he
is, after all, the vice president of the United States.;    "We're preserving
history," says David Schenkel, the exhibition coordinator. "A century from now
someone may want to do a dissertation on him.";    If so, Huntington will be
ready.;    Relatives, former classmates and longtime neighbors of Quayle have
donated yearbooks, report cards, poems, letters, his Little League uniform, a
coffee cup he drank from, a chair he once stood on during the 1988
presidential campaign and just about anything else he ever touched, wrote,
signed or posed for.;    The vice president's mother, Corinne, donated a lock
of his baby hair. The 1972 Indianapolis 500 queen produced a picture of
Quayle, then an aide to Indiana Gov. Edgar Whitcomb, accompanying her to the
race. And a former housekeeper turned in a 20-year-old piece of carpeting she
saved from one of Quayle's floors.;    The exhibition, which runs through May
20, was put together by the Dan Quayle Commemorative Foundation, a sort of
fan-club-turned-archive devoted to documenting the life and times of the
nation's 44th and, they say, least-understood vice president.;    "He has
taken such a bad rap," said Schenkel, a foundation board member. "If people
knew him, they'd see he's a regular person. If they had a chance to sit down
with Dan as a neighbor, they would see the extremely good values in the man.";
   These are the faithful, who have long since stopped expecting "good press"
on their man. Instead they measure news reports on him by their relative
negativity, describing the best coverage as "more upbeat" or "halfway
decent.";    They defend the relatively young age of Quayle, who turned 44 in
February ("All he needs is a little seasoning"); his limited experience ("Look
at what they said about Truman -- he was a haberdasher"), and his passion for
golf ("He has to have some form of relaxation"). But they are careful not to
stretch the superlatives. The description "nice" comes up a lot.;    "He's not
the fool that the talk show hosts think he is," says Dottie Watson, president
of the Republican Women of Huntington County. "He's a very nice person, a
capable person. Everybody I know says he can do it.";    That is not to say
some people don't have some friendly advice for Quayle. "If he would slow
down, talk an octave lower and think about what he's saying, I don't think
people would take him the way they do," said Jean Anne Drabenstot, the owner
of Nick's Kitchen, Quayle's favorite restaurant.;    Hayden Schenkel, chairman
of the Huntington County Democratic Party and a distant cousin of David
Schenkel, says, "Some people would shudder and shiver if he accidentally
became president of the United States. Most of the Democrats and even some of
the Republicans would say they're tickled to death to have him as vice
president, and they're 100 percent behind him. But in all due respect, we sure
hope nothing happens to President Bush.";    Quayle has declined an invitation
to attend the tribute, citing a busy schedule. Nonetheless, most of
Huntington's 17,000 residents have rallied around their native son for the
exhibition, which tracks his life from infancy through law school, from the
Senate to the vice presidency.;    The free exhibition has turned a gray room
in the town's public library into a virtual Dan Quayle museum. The display
patches together pieces of a life that until the last decade was strikingly
ordinary.;    There is Dan Quayle and his brother Chris riding horseback and
wearing cowboy hats, or sitting in front of the fireplace in their pajamas at
Christmas. There is Dan Quayle with his Vacation Bible School class, Dan
Quayle with the high school golf team, Dan Quayle at 5 or 6 years of age with
Sharon McEachern when they were named king and queen of the swim festival at
the Fort Wayne Country Club. It is all very 50s, very Middle American, almost
surreal in its innocence.;    There are windows into the workings of the
Quayle family, too. For example, his father, James, signed the report cards
when Dan brought home poor grades, and his mother signed when he brought home
good ones.;    And there are letters and poems that he wrote, which only go to
show that one does not have to be a Yeats to make it in politics. Dan wrote
this rather thoughtful verse on Nov. 22, 1960, when he was 13 years old:;   
My Dad is very very nice;    But he is not made of sugar and spice.;   
Sometimes he acts as if he has been disturbed;    But at other times he is as
cheerful as a bird.;    The exhibit also includes the 1972 newspaper
announcement of Dan and Marilyn Quayle's wedding, the wooden "Quayle & Quayle"
shingle the couple hung when they opened their law practice here, and assorted
campaign souvenirs, including the official air sickness bag from the 1988
Republican National Convention.;    Ultimately, the foundation wants to build
a repository for the memorabilia. It has already organized a walking tour of
historic Quayle sites, like the white, ranch-style house where he spent his
early days, and Nick's Kitchen, where he likes to order tenderloins, fries and
a milkshake.;    "We want everybody to know he's a winner -- I don't care what
the newspapers say," said Marge Hiner, one of the exhibit organizers. "What a
role model for our children, to know that you can be a normal person, come
from a normal family and become vice president of the United States."  
  ISABEL WILKERSON, New York Times  
  USA  
  Huntington, Ind.  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910519  
  Sunday  
  May  
  1L  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  1,107  
  Sunday May 19, 1991
00140099,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  0  
  ENG  


 AP890323-0234 
AP-NR-03-23-89 1347EST
s a BC-Wal-Mart-WaltonProfile Adv26   03-23 0677
BC-Wal-Mart-Walton Profile, Adv 26,0700
$Adv26
For Release Sunday, March 26, and Thereafter
Retail Empire Built By Bargain-Preaching Entrepreneur
Eds: Also on financial wire
By MARYBETH NIBLEY
AP Business Writer
DE SOTO, Texas (AP) 

   The store manager of the Wal-Mart in this
community on the outskirts of Dallas tells a story that gives an
insight into the man considered responsible for a retailing
phenomenon.
   Manager Don Bost remembers one day last summer when a secretary
telephoned from Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s corporate headquarters in
Bentonville, Ark. Chairman Sam Walton was about to land at a nearby
airport and the secretary asked if someone could fetch him and bring
him to the De Soto store.
   Paying unexpected calls on stores is one way Walton has kept in
close touch with everyday goings-on. His example is followed by
other Wal-Mart executives and most make a point of spending a lot of
time in the field.
   Says Ed Nagy, district manager for 9 stores in the Dallas
metropolitan area, ``It's not like `Uh-oh, someone's coming,'
because they're always out.''
   By all accounts, Sam Walton's personality permeates operations
throughout the company.
   Everyone, from Wal-Mart President and Chief Operating Officer
David Glass down to an hourly store worker, can readily quote the
gospel according to Sam, as he is called.
   To paraphrase Sam's primary rules of retailing, ``Rule No.1 is
the customer is always right. Rule No.2 says just in case the
customer's wrong, revert to rule No.1.''
   If the principles sound old-fashioned and homespun, they are
because that's the way Sam is, people who know him say.
   He shuns the limelight that his company's success has shed on him
and has decided to refuse almost all press requests for interviews.
   He's happy to chat with folks in his stores, though.
   He also regularly reminds Wal-Mart ``associates'' that
hospitality to customers is crucial. He preaches it in person or via
high-tech satellite hookup with his stores.
   Wal-Mart employees became known as associates under a company
effort to prove it cared about employees, partly to thwart a union
organizing effort in the late 1960s.
   One of the most sensitive subjects for Walton is the fortune he's
amassed.
   A close associate says Sam would ``probably give anything'' not
to be named on Fortune magazine's list of the country's wealthiest
people. The magazine has estimated that his immediate family's stake
in Wal-Mart stock is worth about $6.8 billion.
   ``Sam Walton is more interested in his backhand than he is in his
bank account,'' says Don Shinkle, Wal-Mart spokesman.
   Samuel Moore Walton turns 71 on March 29. He was born in
Kingfisher, Okla., and grew up as the son of a farm-mortgage banker.
   He graduated from the University of Missouri with an economics
degree in 1940 and joined J.C. Penney Co. as a management trainee in
Des Moines, Iowa. After serving three years in the Army, he went to
Arkansas and opened a Ben Franklin five-and-dime store, eventually
becoming the company's biggest franchisee.
   The seeds of the Wal-Mart empire were sown when Sam and his
brother James L., or Bud, opened the first Wal-Mart Discount City in
1962. The rest will probably earn an entry in the history of U.S.
retail trade.
   Bud is a senior vice president and board member of Wal-Mart.
Three of the four grown children Sam and his wife Helen had are
involved with the company in various capacities.
   Sam hasn't slowed much, enjoying hunting and tennis as much as
ever, and is said not to suffer after effects from a bout with
leukemia, now in remission. He spends less time in the office since
handing over most responsiblities to David Glass. Sam is still
chairman of the board.
   Glass doesn't hesitate when asked if Wal-Mart can flourish
without Sam. The answer is an emphatic yes because, he says, ``We
have great people.'' The Walton family will always be involved, he
adds.
   Commenting on the future, Glass says: ``We'll be judged on what
we produce today. Tomorrow, what we've done in the past won't
matter.''

End Adv for Sunday, March 26


 AP890615-0263 
AP-NR-06-15-89 1342EST
r f BC-Walton     06-15 0226
BC-Walton,0234
Wal-Mart Founder Pitches in at Check-Out Counter
FORT WALTON BEACH, Fla. (AP) 

   Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton
pitched in to help check-out clerks at his store in this Florida
Panhandle city when an electronic glitch shut down the cash
registers.
   The 71-year-old Walton, considered to be one of the world's
richest people, grabbed a note pad Tuesday evening and started
hand-writing merchandise prices for customers so their bills could
be tallied on calculators quickly.
   ``People began recognizing him and coming up and greeting him,''
said store manager Paul Sively. ``He shook their hands and talked to
everyone he could. The registers were out for about 45 minutes, and
I don't think we had one customer complain.''
   Walton, known for his down-home style, made a surprise visit to
the store that later Tuesday staged a concert by country singer Jana
Jea in its parking lot. Walton often attends promotional events for
his Arkansas-based chain, and Sively said he had suspected the boss
might make an appearance.
   Walton continued talking with customers during the concert. He
also joined the singer on stage to sing a duet and led customers in
the Wal-Mart cheer.
   ``He was up there saying, `Give me a W, give me an A,' and the
customers went right along with him,'' Sively said. ``He even got
down to do a cheerleader's squiggle.''



 AP890711-0223 
AP-NR-07-11-89 0217EST
r f PM-World'sRichest-Walton Bjt   07-11 0505
PM-World's Richest-Walton, Bjt,0521
Wealthy Wal-Mart Founder Just Another Neighbor
By JENNIFER M. FULFORD
Associated Press Writer
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) 

   He's ranked as the richest man in the
nation by a leading business magazine, but to folks in Bentonville,
a town of about 8,700 people, Sam Walton is just another neighbor.
   ``He's just a part of the community,'' said Curt Loyd, executive
director of the Bentonville Chamber of Commerce. ``He's a neat
person. He calls Bentonville home, and that is special to us.''
   Walton, who prefers bird-hunting, tennis and opening new Wal-Mart
stores to trumpeting his personal financial holdings, is again
shunning publicity about his third consecutive ranking among the
world's top billionaires. According to Forbes magazine's July 24
edition, the Walton family's estimated worth is $8.7 billion, up
from its 1988 estimate of $6.5 billion.
   ``He is unavailable,'' said Wal-Mart spokesman Don Shinkle of the
silver-haired founder of the nation's third-largest retail chain,
based in Bentonville, about 150 miles northwest of Little Rock.
   Shinkle said he received about 10 calls from reporters Monday
morning, when the Forbes list appeared in newspapers. Shinkle said
news coverage about Walton ``usually sets off a press frenzy'' for
comments from him. But the 71-year-old businessman declined to
comment.
   ``He feels any attention to Sam Walton is to the individual and
he prefers attention to Sam Walton (the founder of) the company,''
Shinkle said.
   ``He very seldom schedules interviews about his feelings. It just
puts him in a position he doesn't want to be.''
   But Walton occasionally offers peeks that reveal personal
modesty. Just after the 1987 stock market crash, in which Walton's
family-owned chunk of Wal-Mart stock lost millions in value, he
quipped in response to questions at a news conference on another
topic that it was only paper. Walton then changed the subject.
   Walton was first listed by Forbes as the nation's richest man in
October 1985. Three years ago, Forbes also began listing the world's
wealthiest people. Walton made that listing as the richest American
every year since. This year he ranks third, behind two Japanese
businessmen.
   Shinkle said Walton stays busy visiting many of the more than
1,400 stores operated by the company he started as a single
five-and-dime at Rogers more than two decades ago. He is out of the
office up to four days a week, the spokesman said.
   ``He spends most of his time talking to associates and
customers,'' Shinkle said, ``and he always comes back with many
ideas from them.''
   Wal-Mart calls its sales help associates instead of employees.
   When Walton first made the Forbes list of richest Americans,
recalled Little Rock investment banker Warren Simpson, calls came in
from all over about the billionaire from the Ozarks.
   ``They wanted to know about the stock and the company,'' said
Simpson, who works for Stephens Inc. ``You'd think that he'd be
living in New York or LA, not Bentonville, Arkansas. But now people
just accept it.
   ``When it comes out now, it's just, `Yeah, he's still there,'''
Simpson said.



 AP900507-0207 
AP-NR-05-07-90 0731EDT
r f PM-Wal-MartCenter     05-07 0636
PM-Wal-Mart Center,0655
Center Puts Wal-Mart History on Display
BENTONVILLE, Ark. (AP) 

   Forty years after Sam Walton first hung
out his shingle, Walton's 5&10 will reopen to show how a little
rural storekeeper built a discount retail empire.
   Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s Visitors Center opens Wednesday in the
same building on the downtown square where Walton first opened for
business on May 9, 1950.
   The center chronicles the rise of the nation's fastest-growing
discount chain, using displays and audio-video presentations. It
concentrates on how the free enterprise system works and how
Wal-Mart thrived when similar companies didn't.
   The window displays date back to the store's opening, with
Simplicity patterns and Johnson's Glo-Coat, a box of Dreft and some
Ivory Snow. Inside, an electronic map details the company's
1,500-plus store chain today.
   Also on display at the center is the hula skirt that Sam Walton
donned for his ``dance on Wall Street,'' which he performed after
challenging the company to reach a record 8 percent pre-tax profit
in 1984. The goal was accomplished and he danced.
   The old and the modern together reflect the corporate culture of
the nation's biggest discount retailer behind K mart Corp. of
Detroit.
   Walton and his brother, Bud, opened the first Wal-Mart Discount
City in 1962. Both will be on hand for the opening, along with a
sprinkling of other dignitaries, including Gov. Bill Clinton, the
dedication speaker.
   Aside from the other displays and presentations, the center also
has a replica of Sam Walton's original office at the store,
including many fixtures he used 40 years ago.
   Also on display is a photograph of young Sam Walton, a fat-faced
baby born in Oklahoma in the 1920s. Typical of the Wal-Mart
outlook, Dust Bowl Oklahoma is termed ``a place to grow and to
dream'' in a video on the Walton family.
   After a stint with J.C. Penney Co. and the Army, he opened a Ben
Franklin store in Newport in 1945. He lost the lease on that one,
and relocated to Bentonville. That's where the story took off.
   Sam Walton convinced Bob Bogle, then a public health officer, to
take over management of his Bentonville Ben Franklin store in 1955.
   Walton ``said he wanted to put in about a dozen stores'' and
needed someone to tend the shop in Bentonville while he and his
brother built a chain of Ben Franklins, Bogle said in a recent
interview.
   That's when Bogle found himself in Walton's ``learn as you go''
training program.
   ``I got home at 10 o'clock that night after scrubbing and waxing
the floor with Sam,'' Bogle said.
   Inauspicious first impressions are part of the story. In one
video, David Glass, who succeeded Sam Walton as chief executive of
Wal-Mart in 1988, recalled his impressions after attending the
opening of the second Wal-Mart Discount City at Harrison in 1964.
The first store, at Rogers, opened two years earlier.
   ``I thought to myself this is absolutely the worst discount
store, or retail store, I have ever seen,'' said Glass, who was
president of a drugstore chain at the time.
   And Wal-Mart Vice Chairman Donald Soderquist recalls that when
Walton took his idea of putting discount stores in rural areas to
Ben Franklin headquarters in Chicago, officials there ``just really
didn't see a future in it.''
   Don Shinkle, Wal-Mart's director of corporate and public
affairs, attributed Wal-Mart's success to its ``associates'' _ the
term for employees first coined in 1972 to stress that all Wal-Mart
employees are partners in the company _ and to Sam Walton's
leadership and knack for hiring the ``right person at the right
time.''
   At the start of 1990, Wal-Mart owned 1,402 stores, employed
272,000 and listed sales of $25.8 billion. Sam's Wholesale Club
closed out the year with 123 units and Wal-Mart announced plans to
enter the California market.



FT922-14265
_AN-CDGBIAF1FT
920407


FT  07 APR 92 / International Company News: Founder most important retailer
of his generation


   By MARTIN DICKSON


SAM WALTON was arguably the most important retailer of his generation. The
son of an Oklahoma real-estate broker, he opened the first general store in
what was to become the Wal-Mart chain in Bentonville, in the backwaters of
Arkansas, in 1950, writes Martin Dickson.
By 1991 the chain's sales had risen to nearly Dollars 44bn, making it the
world's largest retailer in terms of revenues, and the Walton family
probably America's richest.
Wal-Mart now operates in 43 US states, selling goods ranging from detergents
to golf clubs.
The chain's success stemmed both from Mr Walton's personality and
willingness to challenge accepted retailing orthodoxy.
He was a frugal, modest man who worked extremely long hours from a spartan
room in his Bentonville headquarters but delighted in getting out of the
office to tour stores and meet customers and staff, whom he insisted on
calling 'associates.'
He would deliver pep-talks to employees extolling the virtues of thrift and
customer satisfaction, long before these became fashionable management
buzz-words.
Employee satisfaction - an idea which is only now gaining wider acceptance
in US service industries - was also a vital ingredient in the Walton
philosophy.
He buoyed staff morale with cheer-leading sessions, bonus payments for good
performance and profit-sharing plans which allowed some employees of very
modest means to retire relatively wealthy.
Eight years ago, when Wal-Mart's profits were better than expected, he kept
a promise to staff by dressing in a grass-skirt to dance the hula on Wall
Street.
Also essential to Wal-Mart's growth was its pioneering of high volume,
cut-price retailing throughout the year, rather than the periodic sales
which rivals relied on to generate customer loyalty.
'Low prices always' became Wal-Mart's motto.
Mr Walton also disproved the conventional wisdom that large discount stores
could not operate successfully in the small, rural towns of the US south.
It was precisely such locations which became the bedrock of the business,
though in the process Wal-Mart put out of business hundreds of small main
street stores, prompting bitter resistance in some towns which Mr Walton
tended to blunt with generous charitable donations.

The Financial Times


London Page 26



FT923-5068
_AN-CIEAPABTFT
920903


FT  03 SEP 92 / Book Review: Good ol' boy who made a bundle


   By NIKKI TAIT


MADE IN AMERICA: MY STORY
By Sam Walton
Doubleday, Dollars 22.50. 269 pages
Being an American folk hero is a tricky assignment, as Ross Perot found out.
The problem is that the great American public likes its boot-strap
entrepreneurs to be very rich and very upright. In a country where business
practices are not overly genteel, this is a tough combination to achieve. A
vast media circus, meanwhile, is quick to expose any flaws.
Sam Walton, founder of the Wal-Mart chain of discount supermarkets who died
of cancer in April, negotiated these pitfalls much better than most. When,
in 1985, Forbes magazine declared him America's richest entrepreneur, the
paparazzi descended on the obscure corner of Arkansas, mainly occupied by
chicken farmers, where Walton made his home. What they found was a happily
married, much-liked billionaire who enjoyed quail hunting, breakfasted at
the local Holiday Inn, and drove a battered pick-up truck, minus two
hub-caps. Folksy was an understatement.
Since then, some aspects of Wal-Mart's business - its anti-union policies,
the impact of its Dollars 40bn annual sales on hundreds of Mom-and-Pop shops
 -have been subject to critical scrutiny. So, to an extent, have the less
wholesome adventures of the four Walton children. But no one has ever been
able to make Sam himself look bad. The worst that has been said is that he
was rather dull.
Walton is not about to dash anyone's illusions. Readers will either find his
autobiography lashed with 'good ol'' common-sense and a lot of harmless, if
charming, anecdotes. Or they will find it dreary and downbeat. Walton makes
no excuses: 'I realise this may sound boring to most you,' he writes at one
stage, 'but one of my best items ever was a mattress pad called a Bedmate .
. . .'
A few snippets are more revealing about the character. There cannot be many
billionaires who admit that they 'never learned handwriting too well' - and
have the guts to include a photograph which demonstrates the point.
Meanwhile, the competitive energy which Sam Walton applied to his business
is inescapable. In one of many contributions from friends and family, Don
Soderquist, Wal-Mart's chief operating officer, tells of finding Sam one
Saturday morning on his hand and knees at the local Kmart store, analysing
his rival's stock. And his wife, in a casual aside, notes that when the
couple was on holiday in Italy their luggage vanished while her husband was
off on a similar scouting mission.
But it is David Glass, Wal-Mart's current chief executive, who perhaps
captures the entrepreneurial Walton spirit best. Explaining the annual
contest in which Wal-Mart executives choose one 'volume producing item' to
promote, he recalls the time Sam (who usually won) selected minnow buckets
for carrying bait. Glass was more happily teamed with apple juice. 'So I
would go down to the stores, and get them to take that minnow bucket . . .
put ice in it, ice down the juice and give away samples out of his minnow
bucket. I particularly did it in stores I knew (Sam) was going to visit. It
drove him crazy, and he got off that minnow bucket pretty quick . . . .'
But the reader can't help feeling that the cosy yarns tell only half the
truth. Sam Walton was a salesman to the core, and seems to have packaged
himself with all the skill that he once applied to selling a gooey southern
sweet called Moon Pies.
For the most part, this makes for an engaging, if one-dimensional, portrait.
Occasionally, it just grates. 'I had bought a bank in Bentonville, for about
about Dollars 300,000,' Walton remarks, for example, 'just a little old bank
with only about Dollars 3.5m in deposits. But it helped me learn a lot about
financing things.' Oh, come on Sam, is that the whole story?
The real truth, one suspects, comes right at the end of the book - when
Walton admits that 'if I hadn't gotten sick, I doubt I would have written
this book'. Given the pleadings of publishers - Doubleday paid about Dollars
4m for the manuscript - and a rather natural desire to have a final say, he
can hardly be blamed for agreeing to write it. But these are unlikely to be
circumstances which make for the most critical self-analysis. At the end of
the day, Sam Walton's heritage is in the shopping malls, not the bookstores.

The Financial Times


London Page 18



FT944-12170
_AN-EKBD9AGPFT
941102


FT  02 NOV 94 / FT Review of Business Books (10): Few better qualified -
What is most startling about Wal-Mart is the speed of its growth / Sam
Walton's American dream


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


'WAL-MART: A HISTORY OF SAM WALTON'S RETAIL PHENOMENON' by Sandra S. Vance
and Roy V. Scott Twayne Publishers, New York, Dollars 14.95 240 pages
Many people might be said to be the personification of the American Dream;
few are better qualified for that title than Sam Walton.
Walton is a character it would be difficult to invent, an all-American boy
who became one of the world's most successful businessmen. The church-going
son of a farmer born in 1918 near Kingfisher, Oklahoma, he founded a store
chain which made him America's richest man, and which, shortly before his
death in 1992, became the world's biggest retailer.
His company, Wal-Mart, made sales of Dollars 55bn last year, and after
Walton's death Fortune magazine reported that his wife and four children
held between them the second-largest fortune in the world - Dollars 23.5bn.
What is most startling about Wal-Mart is the speed of its growth. Although
Walton built up a small chain of Ben Franklin variety store franchises from
1945, it was not until 1962 that he opened his first Wal-Mart discount
store.
At the time of its incorporation in 1971, Wal-Mart had only 38 outlets with
sales of Dollars 44m - not enough to earn a place in trade journal Discount
Merchandiser's list of the 71 biggest US discount retailers. Ten years
later, with 330 stores and Dollars 1.6bn sales, it was only the 33rd-biggest
retailer in the US. Its turnover was only 9 per cent of that of Sears
Roebuck, the biggest, and 11 per cent of K mart, the second-biggest. Within
another 10 years, Wal-Mart had overtaken them both.
Apart from Walton's autobiography completed shortly before his death,
however, published material about the company is curiously scarce. This book
attempts to fill the gap, to provide a 'scholarly account' of the rise of
Wal-Mart, setting it in the wider context of US retailing, and explaining
how it was achieved.
One strength the authors identify is Wal-Mart's ability to copy and adapt
from other retailers.
Sam Walton did not invent discount retailing. Rather, he realised the threat
discounting posed to his own variety store business and studied in depth
many of the US's leading discounters of the early 1960s, including Ann and
Hope, E J Korvette, Spartan's, Fed-Mart, and K mart.
Walton learned from them all, but was unique in taking his discount stores
into small towns of a few thousand people, where shoppers used to travelling
long distances were delighted to have a cut-price store nearby selling
everything they needed.
Another strength is Wal-Mart's openness to technology. As early as the
1950s, Walton realised he was wasting too much time travelling and bought a
small aircraft to pilot between stores himself - something he continued to
do to the end of his life.
Sometimes, Walton was more reluctant to invest in technology, and had to be
persuaded by colleagues to introduce computers, and scanning at check-outs -
long before most retailers had recognised their importance - and to invest
Dollars 20m in an internal satellite communications system. This technology
helped Wal-Mart build one of the most efficient distribution systems of any
retailer. But perhaps the most fundamental reason for its success, the book
suggests, has been Wal-Mart's streamlined and highly responsive management
structure.
Regional vice-presidents based at group headquarters in Bentonville,
Arkansas, rather than in costly regional offices, are despatched every
Monday by aircraft to their regions, spend the week visiting stores, working
with staff and managers, and return for a day-long merchandising meeting
every Friday.
They discuss results, problems and suggestions from the week at a 7.30am
meeting on Saturdays and immediately afterwards call district managers to
relate the results. District managers hold a conference call with their
store managers, and before the day is out, the contents of the meeting have
been communicated to all store department heads.
The system means employees can make suggestions to vice-presidents one week
and, if the idea is accepted by the Saturday meeting, see its implementation
begin the following week.
Even the world's most successful retailer makes mistakes, however. One was
Walton's decision to stand down from the chairman and chief executive's role
in 1974 in favour of Ronald Mayer, only to return to both roles in 1976
after finding he was incapable of letting go of the reins. Another was
Wal-Mart's short-lived Hypermart format, which proved too big even for
gigantist America.
Then there was Walton's rash promise to do a 'hula dance' on Wall Street if
Wal-Mart achieved an 8 per cent pre-tax profit margin in 1984. It did, and
he did.
The book also covers well the debate over whether Wal-Mart's impact on the
economies of small US towns was positive or negative.
If there are criticisms, these are that this 'scholarly account' never quite
captures the sheer excitement of working in the world's fastest-growing
retailer. Moreover, it makes little attempt to predict whether Wal-Mart can
continue its growth, and conquer the rest of the world in the way it
conquered the US.
But this is a well-researched and accessible account of one man's success in
building his own American dream.


Countries:-

USZ  United States of America.


Industries:-

P2731 Book Publishing.


Types:-

TECH  Products & Product use.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII



FT923-5589
_AN-CIBBTACQFT
920829


FT  29 AUG 92 / Markets: Hurricane rages but dollar storm blows out - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


WHILE Hurricane Andrew was wreaking havoc across large parts of southern
Florida and Louisiana this week, a grade two dollar crisis (on a one-to-four
scale, four being most severe) was blowing itself out at the end of a
tumultuous few days for US and world financial markets.
On Wall Street, most of the damage from the currency storm was inflicted a
week ago Friday and on the following Monday, when bond yields jumped sharply
and the Dow Jones industrial average plunged by more than 75 points.
The flimsy walls erected hastily by the Federal Reserve and other big
central banks to protect the vulnerable dollar from a tidal wave of selling
on foreign exchange markets failed to hold; and as the sellers poured
through the breached barricades, the currency dropped to DM1.40. This was
its lowest-ever point against the D-mark.
The conditions necessary for a dollar crisis had been building up in
currency markets for some time. Interest rate differentials between US and
Germany widened over the summer as the Fed eased, and the Bundesbank
tightened, their respective monetary policies.
The failure of the US economy to climb out of recession with any vigour was
also making overseas investors increasingly unhappy about holding the
dollar.
So, too, was the political hole President Bush had dug for himself in a
re-election battle that only a year ago was supposed to be a shoo-in for the
incumbent.
Moreover, the fact that almost every central bank worth its salt was in the
markets trying to prop up the dollar served only to convince foreign
exchange dealers that the currency was heading in one direction  - down.
While there were plenty of reasons for the dealers to sell the dollar, the
logic for such a strongly negative reaction from bond and stock markets was
less obviously compelling.
There are two standard explanations why a weak dollar prompts bond prices to
fall. The first is that it raises import prices and, as a result, adds to
inflationary pressures.
The second is that it makes it hard for the Fed to engineer another cut in
interest rates to stimulate the flagging recovery, and raises the
possibility that rates may actually have to go up to protect the currency.
The first explanation is not particularly convincing - imports account for
not much more than 10 per cent of US gross domestic product, so higher
import prices do not greatly effect the overall price level, which is now
around 3 per cent and heading lower.
The second explanation carries more weight. Although there is not much
chance, given the present economic and political climate, that the Fed will
raise rates to help the dollar, there is little doubt that the currency's
weakness makes it extremely difficult for the Fed to ease monetary policy
again.
The fear that the Fed may be done with interest rate cuts for the present
economic cycle was also behind the selling in equity markets. But investors
in stocks were equally, if not more, troubled by the rise in bond yields.
Just over a week ago, the yield on the benchmark 30-year bond, which has
remained stubbornly high all year despite the poor state of the economy,
looked as if it might drop below 7.3 per cent.
The dollar put paid to those hopes and, by the middle of this week, it was
approaching 7.45 per cent, putting an upward pressure on the all-important
mortgage rate for home-buyers.
The dollar was not the only story in financial markets this week, and the
devastating effect of Hurricane Andrew produced a typically hard-eyed,
although nonetheless logical, reaction from Wall Street.
The stocks of those insurance companies with the greatest exposure in
southern Florida, the area hit worst by the hurricane, all took a tumble.
But the relatively modest losses in Geico, Travelers and Progressive
suggested that the market believed the insurers were reserved or reinsured
adequately enough to cover hurricane-related claims.
The flip side of the hurricane's coin was a strong showing from the stocks
of home construction companies expected to benefit from demand for
rebuilding damaged or destroyed homes. Since there are an estimated 250,000
people left homeless by the storm, there is a lot of work to be done.
The biggest gains among construction stocks this week were posted by Lennar,
Oakwood Homes, Engle Homes and Fleetwood, the largest maker of
pre-manufactured homes in the US.

The Financial Times


London Page II



FT923-5797
_AN-CIBBCACSFT
920828


FT  28 AUG 92 / Cleaning up after Andrew


   By AGENCIES


   FLORIDA, NEW ORLEANS


SQUADS of workers fanned out across storm-battered Louisiana yesterday to
begin a massive rebuilding effort after Hurricane Andrew had flattened whole
districts, killing two people and injuring dozens more, agencies report from
Florida and New Orleans.
However, local officials in Florida, hit earlier in the week by the
hurricane, were critical of what they called a delay in supplying food,
drinking water and other supplies for thousands of people in need.
Federal emergency officials acknowledged distribution problems,
Transportation Secretary Andrew Card yesterday promised 'dramatic'
improvements within 24 hours and President George Bush last night ordered
troops to Florida, without specifying a number.
The government estimated it would cost Dollars 20bn-Dollars 30bn to tidy and
rebuild in Florida, and to care for residents displaced by the storm.
Louisiana state officials said they had no overall count of storm-related
injuries but initial estimates reckoned fewer than 100. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency said it was setting aside Dollars 77m to help
Louisiana recover.
Most of the storm's fury was spent against sparsely populated farming
communities and swampland in the state, sparing it the widespread
destruction caused in Florida, where 15 people died.
Official estimates in Miami reported that the hurricane had wiped out the
homes of one Dade County resident in eight - a quarter of a million people.
Andrew had become little more than a strong rainstorm early yesterday,
moving across Mississippi state and heading for the north-eastern US.
Several of Louisiana's main industries were affected, including those of
oysters and alligators. Wildlife and fisheries secretary Joe Herring
estimated a 50 per cent decline in the alligator industry. The cotton and
sugar-cane crops were threatened, the state agriculture department said.
Most Louisiana oil refineries, however, were barely affected and deliveries
of crude oil were expected to resume yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 4



FT923-5835
_AN-CIBBCABPFT
920828


FT  28 AUG 92 / UK Company News: GA says hurricane claims could reach 'up to
Dollars 40m'


   By ROBERT PESTON


GENERAL ACCIDENT, the leading British insurer, said yesterday that insurance
claims arising from Hurricane Andrew could 'cost it as much as Dollars 40m.'
Lord Airlie, the chairman who was addressing an extraordinary shareholders'
meeting, said: 'On the basis of emerging information, General Accident
advise that the losses to their US operations arising from Hurricane Andrew,
which struck Florida and Louisiana, might in total reach the level at which
external catastrophe reinsurance covers would become exposed'.
What this means is that GA is able to pass on its losses to external
reinsurers once a certain claims threshold has been breached.
It believes this threshold may be breached in respect of Hurricane Andrew
claims.
However, if this happens, it would suffer a post-tax loss of Dollars 40m
(Pounds 20m).
Mr Nelson Robertson, GA's chief general manager, explained later that the
company has a  1/2 per cent share of the Florida market. It has a branch in
Orlando.
The company's loss adjusters are in the area trying to estimate the losses.
Their guess is that losses to be faced by all insurers may total more than
Dollars 8bn.
Not all damaged property in the area is insured and there have been
estimates that the storm caused more than Dollars 20bn of damage.
However, other insurers have estimated that losses could be as low as
Dollars 1bn in total.
Mr Robertson said: 'No one knows at this time what the exact loss is'.

The Financial Times


London Page 16



FT923-6038
_AN-CH1BVABKFT
920827


FT  27 AUG 92 / Hurricane batters southern US but lets insurers off lightly


   By MARTIN DICKSON and ROBERT PESTON


   NEW YORK, LONDON


HURRICANE Andrew, claimed to be the costliest natural disaster in US
history, yesterday smashed its way through the state of Louisiana,
inflicting severe damage on rural communities but narrowly missing the
low-lying city of New Orleans.
The storm, which brought havoc to southern Florida on Monday and then headed
north-west across the Gulf of Mexico, had made landfall late on Tuesday
night some 60 miles south-west of the city in the agricultural Cajun
country.
Although the damage from the hurricane's landfall in Florida on Monday was
much greater than initially esti mated, insurers' losses there are likely to
total less than Dollars 1bn, well below earlier expectations, a senior
member of Lloyd's insurance market said yesterday.
In Louisiana, the hurricane landed with wind speeds of about 120 miles per
hour and caused severe damage in small coastal centres such as Morgan City,
Franklin and New Iberia. Associated tornadoes devastated Laplace, 20 miles
west of New Orleans.
Then, however, Andrew lost force as it moved north over land. By yesterday
afternoon, it had been down-graded to tropical storm, in that its sustained
windspeeds were below 75 mph.
Initial reports said at least one person had died, 75 been injured and
thousands made homeless along the Louisiana coast, after 14 confirmed deaths
in Florida and three in the Bahamas.
The storm caused little damage to Louisiana's important oil-refining
industry, although some plants had to halt production when electricity was
cut.
The Lloyd's member, in close contact with leading insurers in Florida, said
that damage to insured property was remarkably small. More than Dollars 15bn
of damage may have been caused in all, but was mostly to uninsured property,
he said.
In north Miami, damage is minimal. Worst affected is one hotel, whose
basement was flooded. Most of the destruction occurred in a 10-mile band
across Homestead, 25 miles to the south of Miami, where a typical house
sells for Dollars 100,000 to Dollars 150,000. US insurers will face a bill
in respect of such properties, but Lloyd's exposure there is minimal.
Many destroyed power lines are thought to be uninsured, as are trees and
shrubs uprooted across a wide area. Only one big hotel in that area has been
badly damaged, a Holiday Inn.
Across Florida, some 2m people remained without electric ity yesterday and
health officials were warning the public to boil or chemically treat all
water.
Hurricane Hugo, which devastated much of South Carolina in 1989, cost the
insurance industry some Dollars 4.2bn. Further uninsured losses may have
raised the total to Dollars 6bn-Dollars 10bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 6



FT923-6110
_AN-CH0BVADPFT
920826


FT  26 AUG 92 / Hurricane damage put at Dollars 20bn as 2m people told to
leave homes


   By MARTIN DICKSON and NORMA COHEN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


DAMAGE CAUSED by Hurricane Andrew could rise to Dollars 20bn, it was
estimated yesterday, as one of the costliest US storms this century
threatened a further devastating landfall near the city of New Orleans.
Government officials in Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas yesterday advised
or ordered more than 2m people to evacuate coastal areas.
The hurricane tore through southern Florida early on Monday morning, causing
billions of dollars of property damage and at least 12 deaths, and yesterday
was moving north-west across the Gulf of Mexico with winds of about 140
miles an hour.
At least three people died on Sunday when Hurricane Andrew crossed the
Bahamas.
Ms Kate Hale, director of emergency services in Florida's Dade County, which
bore the brunt of the storm, estimated that Andrew had already caused
Dollars 15bn to Dollars 20bn (Pounds 7.5bn-Pounds 10bn) of damage.
However, insurance industry analysts cautioned that it was too early to
assess the costs accurately. The US industry's Property Claims Service, the
official compiler of disaster losses, had yet to compile a preliminary tally
of the Florida bill.
A hurricane warning was in effect yesterday along 470 miles of Gulf coast
from Pascagoula, Mississippi, to Galvestone, Texas.
Several forecasting agencies suggested the likeliest landfall was in central
Louisiana, to the west of New Orleans, possibly late last night or this
morning.
New Orleans, with a population of 1.6m, is particularly vulnerable because
the city lies below sea level, has the Mississippi River running through its
centre and a large lake immediately to the north.
Much of America's oil refining industry is concentrated along coastal Texas
and Louisiana and several refineries were yesterday partially shut down.
These included British Petroleum's Belle Chasse plant in Louisiana.
In Florida, Andrew caused greatest havoc in a largely suburban swathe some
10-15 miles south of Miami. The town of Homestead, near the centre of the
storm, was largely flattened, including a local air force base.
Miami's city centre escaped with relatively light damage. More than 24 hours
after the hurricane, some 825,000 households and businesses were still
without power.
The brunt of insurance claims from the Florida storm will fall on the US
industry, and companies with a heavy local exposure include the State Farm
Group and the Allstate Insurance unit of Sears Roebuck. These are also the
leading property/casualty and home insurance groups in Louisiana, together
with American International Group.
A spokesman for State Farm Insurance said he believed the company had
roughly 20 per cent of the Florida market. The mutually-owned company has no
reinsurance. Its size has made obtaining reinsurance cover difficult and its
reserves, at about Dollars 24bn, have made it unnecessary.
According to Balcombe Group, a UK-based claims adjustment firm, other
insurers with large exposure in the hurricane-hit area are Hartford
Insurance, Aetna and Travellers. Travellers said it had flown 50 claims
adjusters in to Florida late on Monday and was assessing losses. About 12
per cent of Travellers' home insurance premium income came from Florida last
year, and 4.6 per cent of its commercial insurance premiums.
The last serious US hurricane, Hugo, which struck South Carolina in 1989,
cost the industry Dollars 4.2bn from insured losses, though estimates of the
total damage caused ranged between Dollars 6bn and Dollars 10bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 14



FT923-6455
_AN-CHZBXAACFT
920825


FT  25 AUG 92 / US insurers face heaviest hurricane damage claims


   By MARTIN DICKSON and NORMA COHEN


   NEW YORK, LONDON


US CITIES along the Gulf of Mexico from Alabama to eastern Texas were on
storm watch last night as Hurricane Andrew headed west after sweeping across
southern Florida, causing at least eight deaths and severe property damage.
The hurricane was one of the fiercest in the US in decades and the first to
hit Miami directly in a quarter of a century. In the Bahamas, government
spokesman Mr Jimmy Curry said four deaths had been reported on outlying
eastern islands.
Mr Justin Balcombe, of UK-based insurance adjuster Balcombe Group, said
total losses could exceed Dollars 15bn if business interruption claims were
taken into account. That compares with the Dollars 4bn-Dollars 6n (Pounds
2.1bn-Pounds 3.1bn) of insurance industry losses caused by the last big US
hurricane, Hugo, which hit South Carolina in 1989.
The brunt of the losses are likely to be concentrated among US insurers,
industry analysts said yesterday.
Mr George Lloyd-Roberts, chairman of Lloyd's Underwriters' Non-Marine
Association, said that, unless damage claims exceeded Pounds 3bn, the
Lloyd's insurance market would feel little impact. Because the reinsurance
of reinsurance risk  - known as the retrocession market  - has shrunk
considerably in recent years, US insurers have placed far fewer of their
risks through Lloyd's.
Mr Roger Hill, insurance analyst at Warburg Securities, said he estimated
that mainline UK insurers faced no more than Pounds 75m in damage claims so
far.
'At the moment we are relaxed about it,' he said. The real question, he
added, is the level of reinsurance available to the UK underwriters.
Royal Insurance estimated the company's losses at no more than Pounds 20m.
Among other UK insurers, Mr Hill estimated that General Accident may face
losses of up to Pounds 30m, while Guardian Royal Exchange faced Pounds 5m
and Sun Alliance and Commercial Union Pounds 10m each.
However, Hurricane Andrew gathered fresh strength as it moved across the
Gulf of Mexico and there was concern last night that it might head towards
New Orleans, which is especially low lying and could suffer severe flood
damage.
Scientists said the storm could make landfall anywhere between the Alabama
port of Mobile and the Louisiana-Texas border, probably tomorrow night or
early Thursday.
It could threaten the large concentration of offshore oil production
facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. Shell Oil was evacuating most of the 900
workers on its offshore platforms as a precaution.
A substantial part of America's oil refining industry is concentrated on the
Gulf coast, in Louisiana and Texas, and officials there were reviewing
emergency plans to curtail or shut down plant operations.
Andrew, the first Caribbean hurricane of the season, hit the eastern coast
of Florida early yesterday, gusting up to 165mph. It ripped roofs off
houses, smashed cars and trucks, snapped power lines and uprooted trees
before heading out over the Gulf.
A million people had been ordered to flee their homes in southern Florida as
the hurricane moved in from the Bahamas on Sunday. The Florida Power and
Light company said that about 1.2m of its customers, or 32 per cent, were
without power.
Some of the strongest winds were in the affluent suburb of Coral Gables,
just south of Miami, where the National Hurricane Center is located. Its
radar and satellite antennae were blown away.
President Bush authorised federal disaster assistance for the affected areas
and made plans for an inspection tour of the state.
Picture, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1



 AP900621-0192 
AP-NR-06-21-90 2028EDT
u i AM-CheckpointCharlie     06-21 0323
AM-Checkpoint Charlie,0330
Famed Allied Border Crossing Ready for Removal Friday
By MARK FRITZ
Associated Press Writer
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Allied border
crossing by the Berlin Wall, was to be hauled away Friday.
   U.S. Army Sgt. Lorn Walsh late Thursday stood sentry for the
last time by the little white shack, rendered unnecessary by the
thaw in East-West relations.
   ``This is a nice way to end my military service ... to be here
when they take it down,'' said Walsh, 23, a military police officer
who leaves the army in six weeks to study for the priesthood.
   A huge crane hung over the small house in the middle of the
narrow street that leads to East Berlin, where a sign in English,
German, Russian and French says: ``You are now leaving the American
sector.''
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze and their colleagues from France, Britain and
the two Germanys were to preside over a ceremony marking the
checkpoint's removal Friday.
   The envoys from the German states and the four World War II
Allies that divided them were in East Berlin to discuss the
international aspects of German unification.
   Since East Germany overthrew its Communist government last fall
and the German borders were opened, Checkpoint Charlie has become
as superfluous as the crumbling Berlin Wall.
   With huge sections of the Berlin Wall being ripped down daily,
U.S. officials decided two weeks ago to remove Checkpoint Charlie.
   The border crossing was the scene of stirring escapes and
heartbreaking captures as East Germans tried flee to the West,
breaking through East German control stations just 20 yards away
from the Allied checkpoint.
   East Germans once manned their side of the checkpoint with
emotionless effiency, closely scrutinizing travel documents and
creating a palpable tension. Thursday night, they merely waved
Westerners through their side of the checkpoint, although some
tourists demanded their documents be checked.



 AP900622-0080 
AP-NR-06-22-90 1133EDT
u i PM-CheckpointCharlie 4thLd-Writethru a0527 06-22 0653
PM-Checkpoint Charlie, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0527,0669
Famous Allied Checkpoint Dividing East And West Berlin Removed
Eds: To UPDATE with details about Shevardnadze proposal, SUB 8th
graf pvs, `But the...' Pickup 9th pvs, `Berlin has...'
By MARK FRITZ
Associated Press Writer
WEST BERLIN (AP) 

   Soldiers from three nations locked the doors
of Checkpoint Charlie today and a crane whisked away the Cold War
relic that symbolized a divided world.
   A U.S. Army band played a stirring song about old Berlin as the
rectangular white sentry station, a place East Germans died trying
to reach, was hoisted onto a truck for its passage into history.
   The famed Allied checkpoint by the Berlin Wall was closed with
an elaborate ceremony that brought together the top diplomats from
the Germanys and the four World War II Allies.
   ``For 29 years Checkpoint Charlie embodied the Cold War,'' U.S.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III told a crowd of invited
guests and journalists on Berlin's Friedrich Street.
   ``And now, 29 years after it was built, we meet here today to
dismantle it and to bury the conflicts it created.''
   Baker, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and the
foreign ministers from France, Britain and the two Germanys each
heralded the end of the checkpoint as a symbol of change.
   Shevardnadze called for the removal of Berlin's status as an
Allied-controlled city and the withdrawal of troops within six
months after the two German states unify, which could come in
December.
   The proposal, as translated into English by the Soviets and
distributed later to news media, apparently would also include the
Kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper. The
United States, France and Great Britain have an estimated 12,000
troops in West Berlin.
   Berlin has been split into Soviet, U.S., British and France
sectors and West Berlin remains technically separate from West
Germany.
   The German and Allied foreign ministers are meeting in East
Berlin to discuss the status of the city and a united Germany's
role in world affairs.
   All borders are to be opened between the Berlins and the
Germanys by July 2, when the nations merge their economies.
   Large sections of the Berlin Wall are being dismantled daily,
and U.S. officials decided to time the removal of Checkpoint
Charlie with the foreign ministers' meeting.
   A color guard of French, British and American soldiers strode to
the building and locked the doors leading to each Allied nation's
compartment in the checkpoint.
   The giant crane then lifted the box-like building high into the
air. U.S. Army spokesman Sgt. Ed McCarthy said he believes it is
destined for a museum.
   Checkpoint Charlie stood just 20 yards from an East German
checkpoint and was the only place between the Berlins that could be
crossed on foot by non-Germans.
   The ceremony was closed to the public but not to the residents
of the buildings that line Friedrich Street, which had been divided
by the Berlin Wall since 1961.
   Illa Wobig leaned out her window and watched the ceremony unfold
just 20 yards below the fourth-floor apartment where she has lived
for 24 years.
   ``I saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' she said.
``I saw an East German officer try to go under a guard rail. He was
shot in the neck.''
   She said she also saw at least 20 successful escapes, by tunnel,
car and on foot.
   ``I saw Kennedy, Reagan and Carter give speeches here,'' she
said. ``I saw a James Bond movie filmed here. This is wonderful for
history but it is sad for me. It was part of my home.''
   East German construction worker Andreas Bratke was working near
the wall in January 1986 when he suddenly bolted through the East
German checkpoint, down Friedrich Street and through Checkpoint
Charlie.
   ``I ran as fast as I could,'' he said from his home in West
Berlin. ``Checkpoint Charlie is a very important place to me.''



 AP900622-0087 
AP-NR-06-22-90 1236EDT
u i PM-Germany-Soviet 4thLd-Writethru   06-22 0576
PM-Germany-Soviet, 4th Ld-Writethru,a0539,0590
Soviets Say Germany Can Join NATO AFter Five Years
Eds: LEADS thruout to UPDATE with Soviets saying united Germany
can join NATO after five years, US rejecting proposal, details and
background. No pickup.
By DEBORAH G. SEWARD
Associated Press Writer
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   The Soviet Union said today that a united
Germany can join NATO after a five-year transition period during
which all Soviet and U.S. troops would leave the country. The
United States rejected the proposal, a U.S. official said.
   The proposal was outlined by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard
Shevardnadze during international talks in East Berlin on the
strategic future of a united Germany.
   The remarks, a copy of which were obtained by The Associated
Press, indicates that a united Germany would be free to join the
Western NATO alliance after a five-year transitional period.
   But in exchange, Western and Soviet troops would pull out of the
country and Germany's own military strength would be sharply
reduced, according to the proposal.
   Shevardnadze made the proposal as he met with U.S. Secretary of
State James A. Baker III and their counterparts from Britain,
France and the two German states.
   ``I am underwhelmed,'' Baker said when asked about the Soviet
proposal while posing for pictures with the other foreign ministers.
   A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said U.S.
officials objected to the five-year time limit before Germany could
join NATO. The official said the other Western ministers expressed
the same reservations.
   The United States wants a united Germany to be a member of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Soviet Union has been
staunchly opposed.
   West Germany now is a mainstay of NATO and East Germany is a
member of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.
   Shevardnadze said the Soviet proposal seeks to limit the
strength of the German armed forces and ``to revamp their structure
to make sure that they are rendered incapable for offensive
operations.''
   It said those reductions could be undertaken over a three-year
period. Germany also would be prevented from producing or deploying
chemmical or nuclear weapons.
   It also said that within six months of unification, all Western
troops should leave West Berlin, which remains technically under
military occupation by the United States, France and Britian.
   The four nations would reduce their military forces in the
country during a three-year period following unification first by
50 percent, then ``bring them down to a level of token contingents,
or completely withdraw them from Germany.''
   There are about 380,000 Soviet troops in East Germany, while a
quarter-million U.S. troops are stationed in West Germany along
with tens of thousands of British and French soldiers.
   Previously, the Soviets had said their troops would stay in what
is now East Germany for several years, but had left unclear the
exact plans for pulling them out.
   Shevardnadze, speaking earlier at a ceremony for the removal of
the Western Allies' Checkpoint Charlie, said he wanted the Big Four
Powers' troops out of ``greater Berlin'' within six months after
unification.
   The proposal, as translated into English by the Soviets and
distributed to the news media, apparently would also include the
Kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper.
   The United States, France and Great Britain have an estimated
12,000 troops in West Berlin. An official reached by telephone in
the office of the military attache at the Soviet embassy in East
Berlin said there were no Soviet troops stationed in the city
proper.



 AP900623-0009 
AP-NR-06-23-90 0148EDT
r i PM-CheckpointCharlie     06-23 0786
PM-Checkpoint Charlie,0816
Famed Border Crossing Consigned to History
Eds: Also in Saturday AMs report.
LaserPhotos FRA4,BER1,BER5
By MARK FRITZ
Associated Press Writer
WEST BERLIN (AP) 

   Maik Polster was a stern-faced member of the
East German secret police. Patrick Gainey took pictures for the
U.S. Army.
   Andreas Bratke was an East German who wanted to be a West
German. Illa Wobig saw eight people just like him die on her street.
   What they all had in common was a little white shack on the west
side of the Berlin Wall, a guardhouse with a funny name that stood
as a chilling symbol of the tensions that divided a street, a city,
a nation, the world.
   Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Allied border crossing on the west
side of the Berlin Wall, was lifted into the sky by a giant crane
Friday, placed gently onto a flatbed truck and consigned to history.
   It was emptied, locked and taken away in an elaborate ceremony
attended by six foreign ministers, a brace of generals, a brass
brand and hundreds of reporters.
   ``Sir, dismiss your detachment!'' French Maj. Gen. Francois Lann
barked to a young American officer, who crisply led away the last
contingent of military police.
   The public was not invited to the ceremony on Friedrich Street,
the avenue blocked by Checkpoint Charlie and its once-feared East
German counterpart nearby.
   Illa Wobig raised six children in a fourth-floor apartment just
20 yards from Checkpoint Charlie. They saw it from their window for
24 years, and they saw it disappear Friday.
   ``I saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' said Mrs.
Wobig, 55. ``I saw an East German officer try to go under a guard
rail. He was shot in the neck.''
   She said she saw at least 20 successful escapes.
   ``Some were in cars and some came through a tunnel across the
street,'' she said. ``Some would walk very slowly, look around and
just run.''
   She is not sure if one of the people she saw was Andreas Bratke,
a 23-year-old East Berlin construction worker.
   Tunnels, balloons, customized vehicles and other elaborate
methods were used to flee past the Berlin Wall by desperate East
Germans.
   Bratke just ran.
   ``I ran as fast as I could,'' he said. ``I still cannot believe
it.''
   Bratke is now a West Berlin engineering student. He was taking
his certification examinations this week.
   Eight months after Bratke made his bold escape, Sgt. Patrick
Gainey was coming back from a party when he saw a huge commotion
near Checkpoint Charlie.
   ``This guy had driven a cement truck with his girlfriend and
baby through the checkpoint,'' said Gainey, a U.S. Army
photographer. ``He drove a half-mile into the west side just to
make sure. When he stopped, he asked if he was in West Berlin.''
   The escapee was Hans-Joachim Pofahl, who made the crossing
through a hail of bullets.
   East Germany's border guards were as feared as members of the
secret police. According to guard Maik Polster, they were members
of the secret police.
   ``I was with the state security,'' said Polster, 23, as he
genially waved tourists through the East German checkpoint that is
expected to follow Checkpoint Charlie into oblivion.
   ``We had to maintain a certain level of appearance,'' he said.
``No smiling, no joking. We had to watch for everything.''
   The stone-faced scrutiny of the East German border guards helped
give Checkpoint Charlie its chilling cachet.
   The checkpoint went up with the Berlin Wall in 1961.
   With the wall being dismantled daily in anticipation of German
unification, U.S. officials decided to remove Checkpoint Charlie
with a grand flourish.
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze and their counterparts from France, Britain and
the two Germanys presided over the ceremony.
   While the Berlin Wall is coming down, temporary barricades were
put up to keep the public from the ceremony. Several hundred craned
their necks to watch from a half-block away.
   Eilli Wiechies, 60, watched the pageantry from his wheelchair on
the sidewalk in front of his apartment house, one of the few
regular people allowed on the grounds.
   ``Finally, Germans can cross,'' he said, bitter that the Allied
border crossing was reserved only for non-Germans.
   A U.S. Army band played ``That is the Berlin Atmosphere,'' a
stirring old song about the old Berlin, as the white checkpoint
building was lifted to within 30 feet of Mrs. Wobig's window.
   A sign saying ``What a pity, Checkpoint Charlie,'' hung from her
sill.
   ``I saw Kennedy, Reagan and Carter give speeches here,'' she
said. ``I saw a James Bond movie filmed here. This is wonderful for
history, but it is sad for me. It was part of my home.''



 LA062290-0172 
 237443 


June 22, 1990, Friday, P.M. Final 




Part P; Page 2; Column 3; Late Final Desk 




364 words 




CHECKPOINT CHARLIE COMES IN FROM COLD WAR ERA 




From Reuters 




WEST BERLIN 




Checkpoint Charlie, the Berlin Wall border post that symbolized the Cold War, 
was hoisted into history today. 


As a brass band played and foreign ministers of the four World War II allies 
watched, a crane lifted the prefabricated hut with its American, British and 
French flags and placed it on a flatbed truck to be taken to a museum. 


Checkpoint Charlie went up in 1961 in the middle of the Friedrichstrasse 
boulevard after Communist East Germany erected the Berlin Wall to choke off a 
flood of refugees to the enclave of West Berlin. 


"The checkpoint symbolized our conviction as allies that Berlin should remain 
one city and travel within it should be free," British Foreign Secretary 
Douglas Hurd said in a speech. 


"We always hoped that one day Checkpoint Charlie would no longer be needed, and 
now that day has arrived. At long last, we are bringing Charlie in from the 
cold," he added. 


Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze attended the ceremony in a 
gesture of reconciliation with the Western members of the wartime alliance: 
Britain, France and the United States. 


Shevardnadze, the first Soviet foreign minister to visit West Berlin, noted 
that the checkpoint was vanishing on the 49th anniversary of the Nazi invasion 
of the Soviet Union. 


"The closing of this checkpoint offers further proof of a turn for the better 
in the international arena, for overcoming the legacy of confrontation," he 
said. 


Foreign ministers Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany and Markus Meckel of 
East Germany also attended the ceremony. Genscher thanked Moscow for reform 
policies that had ended "a time of trouble" in Berlin and opened the door to 
unity. 


Hundreds of excited Berliners leaned from balconies and windows today to cheer 
Charlie's exit, snapping pictures and clapping in rhythm with the band as the 
crane pried the hut from its moorings and swung it away. 


Former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt, who emotionally challenged the 
building of the wall as mayor of West Berlin in the early 1960s, was in the 
front row of an invited audience. 


Afterward, souvenir hunters ran up and snatched cobblestones that had served as 
Checkpoint Charlie's foundation. 




Photo, Landmark building at Checkpoint Charlie is removed today by a crane in a 
ceremony attended by representatives of the West and the East. Reuters 




Wire 




 AP890925-0009 
AP-NR-09-25-89 0037EDT
r i PM-OneGermany     09-25 1121
PM-One Germany,1155
German Reunification Again Under Discussion as Changes Sweep Europe
Eds: Also in Monday AMs report.
An AP Extra
By KEVIN COSTELLOE
Associated Press Writer
FRANKFURT, West Germany (AP) 

   Three decades ago, a West German
politician said German reunification was a ``sleeping lioness''
that would awake one day with a mighty roar.
   Now, there is growing speculation the awakening may be at hand
to create a giant political and economic machine that could
dominate Europe.
   ``Reunification is coming closer, but I can't say whether it
will take 10, 15 or 20 years,'' says West German conservative
lawmaker Eduard Lintner. ``We have the impression that things are
much more concrete than we could have imagined five years ago.''
   The daily sight of thousands of refugees fleeing East German
leader Erich Honecker's hard-line Communist rule for the capitalist
West has revived international interest in the debate.
   Once dismissed as a nostalgic daydream, the idea of German
reunification has gotten a public nod from President Bush and
something short of a categorical ``no'' from President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.
   The idea makes East German leaders virtually apopletic.
   ``If there were a free choice under the present circumstances in
the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), certainly 80 percent
to 90 percent would vote for national reunification with the
Federal Republic of Germany,'' added the 44-year-old Lintner in an
Associated Press interview.
   The West German constitution calls for a united Germany, but it
has not been a paramount concern of the West Germans in the years
since the ruins of Nazi Germany were divided into East and West at
the end of World War II.
   Full national reunification would completey rework the postwar
European order mapped out by the conquering Allies. It is a
prospect that creates unease in Britain and France, and in Poland
in the East bloc.
   London's prestigious Sunday Times on Sept. 10 mapped out a
possible scenario that includes massive troop reductions in Europe,
Honecker's death and further Westernization of Poland and Hungary.
   ``Moscow unilaterally abolishes the Warsaw Pact after guarantees
from Poland and Hungary they will not join other alliances,'' the
Times' futuristic view continued. ``West Germany withdraws from
NATO; and a referendum in both East and West Germany votes for
reunification and neutrality.''
   That sort of talk is being heard more and more as Moscow loosens
its hold on the East bloc and countries like the Soviet Union,
Poland and Hungary explore democratic reforms.
   The implications of pulling down the Berlin Wall and other
barriers to link the two German states are enormous and, for many,
ominous.
   As much of Western Europe heads towards its own unification in
1992, the economic center of gravity would be shifted even further
to the German side with a powerhouse of nearly 80 million people _
61.1 million West Germans and 16.6 million East Germans.
   West Germany is already Europe's largest exporting nation, and
despite its many flaws East Germany's economy is the envy of many
Soviet bloc neighbors.
   A unified Germany could become the political focal point of a
continent already in flux, as democratic movements sweep parts of
the Soviet bloc.
   Older generations recall eerie echoes of Nazi dictator Adolf
Hitler's boasting that he had brought about ``the unity of the
German nation.''
   Eva Kulesza, head of research for the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe at the French Institute of International Relations, says she
believes that ``as far as public opinion there is new sort of
mistrust toward Germany.
   ``This new fear of Germany is linked to German economic trends.
Germany is much stronger, much more dynamic than France,'' she
added.
   Since West Germany and East Germany are at the front lines of
two competing alliances, any signs for eventual reunification would
have to come from Washington and Moscow.
   During a news conference last week in Montana, Bush said that
reunification is a ``matter for the Germans to decide.''
   But he added: ``If that (reunification) was worked out between
the Germanys, I do not think we should view that as bad for Western
interests.''
   For his part, Gorbachev evaded the issue during a news
conference in Bonn in June, saying only, ``the situation in Europe
today was determined by historical realities.''
   Outside Germany, political leaders and commentators have been
sharply divided on the issue.
   ``In thinking about the German Question, we ought not to be
governed by old prejudices and out-of-date assumptions,'' wrote
commentator Peter Jenkins in London's The Independent. ``The Cold
War was conducted in the name of freedom and, today, if the coming
of freedom to East Germany brings a desire for unity which finds
its echo in the Federal Republic, we ought not to be opposed.''
   Willy Brandt, the Social Democrat who sought greater ties to the
East as chancellor in the 1970s, said German unity doesn't
necessarily mean a single state although he called reunification a
``hypothesis that cannot be excluded.''
   As talk grows in the West, the positions against reunification
almost seem to harden in East Germany, as people leave the country
in near-record numbers. More than 100,000 East Germans are expected
to resettle in West Germany this year, leaving a gaping hole in the
Communist nation's work force.
   Little is likely to change in East Germany as long as the
77-year-old Honecker and his aging comrades stay in power.
   During a September 1987 visit to Bonn, Honecker called respect
for Europe's present borders a basic condition of peace.
   ``Socialism and capitalism can't be any more united than fire
and water,'' Honecker added on the issue of reunification.
   There are virtually no indications that Honecker's successors
will be inclined to democratic reforms, let alone joining the
capitalist West.
   The calls for reunification have already found a sympathetic ear
among some leaders of the Polish Solidarity movement, in the
country that suffered some of the Nazis' most brutal savagery.
   ``After all, the abnormal situation of the German nation
overshadows the whole of Polish-German relations,'' member of
Parliament Adam Michnik wrote on Monday in the pro-Solidarity daily
newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza, which he edits.
   The renewed talk of reunification is recalling the nearly
prophetic words of Reinhold Maier, a prominent West German state
governor who later went on to head the centrist Free Democratic
Party.
   ``Reunification is resting in our midst like a sleeping lioness.
Tired and weak, indecisive people in West Germany are trying not to
disturb her sleep,'' Maier predicted in 1955. ``The lioness will
one day wake up, blink, snap her her tail and start to roar.''
   Still, many in both East and West still agree with the 1967 quip
by Nobel Prize-winning French author Francois Mauriac: ``I love
Germany so much, I'm delighted that there are two of them.''



 AP891111-0064 
AP-NR-11-11-89 1140EST
u w AM-GermanReunification Bjt   11-11 0725
AM-German Reunification, Bjt,700
East German Changes Spark Interest in Reunification
By GEORGE GEDDA
Associated Press Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   The concept of a reunified Germany enjoys
support from the United States and other countries but some
analysts believe the consequences of a political and economic
German superstate could have an unsettling effect throughout Europe.
   The lifting of travel restrictions by East Germany on Thursday
has breathed new life into the idea of a single German state,
drawing expressions of support from the Bush administration and
others.
   But Soviet affairs expert William Hyland says that despite these
assertions, a reunified Germany is ``really terrifying to most of
the countries involved, to the West Germans, to the United States,
Soviet Union, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
   ``No one really wants German unity except the East German
people, and they turn out to be the decisive factor,'' says Hyland,
a one-time top aide to former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger.
   It was just 2{ months ago when ceremonies were held
commemorating the 50th anniversary of the start of World War II, a
time when a unified Germany initiated what was to become the
slaughter of more than 50 million people.
   While a recurrence of that nightmare seems remote at best under
any scenario, an undivided Germany could become the unchallenged
economic and political force on the continent.
   The official U.S. policy on the reunification question was
outlined last Thursday by State Department deputy spokesman Richard
Boucher.
   ``Reunification has been supported by NATO and by the United
States for 40 years, and our strongly held view is that
reunification or reconciliation between the peoples of Germany must
take place in peace and freedom,'' he said.
   As former National Security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski sees it,
the reunification issue will become ``very, very active'' if a
freely elected government takes power in East Germany.
   That possibility has been mentioned by East German leaders as
part of the ongoing reform process.
   Brzezinski asks: ``How do we arrange for the unification of
Germany, so that it doesn't become destabilizing, so it isn't a
threat to Germany's neighbors _ France, Poland, Czechoslovakia?
   ``These are the issues we really have to very hard think about.
We have to think of a new structure between NATO and the Warsaw
Pact. That is our new agenda.''
   Theodore Sorenson, a top aide to President John F. Kennedy when
the Berlin Wall was built in 1961, says he hopes a reunited Germany
will be forged as part of a reunited Europe.
   Reunification, Sorenson says, ``will pose problems, because we
couldn't afford to have a reunited Germany outside the Western
Alliance. The Soviet Union couldn't afford to have a reunited
Germany as part of the Western Alliance.
   ``That's why I hope it will be a reunited Europe within which
the reunited Germany can take place,'' Sorenson says.
   Bernard Rogers, a former commander of allied forces in Europe,
does not think reunification is inevitable. Some form of
federation, he believes, is more likely.
   Rogers notes that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev has said
the nations of eastern Europe can do what they want so long as they
stay in the Warsaw Pact.
   ``If East Germany stays in the Warsaw Pact, NATO, with the best
of its ability, would try to prevent full reunification; maybe a
confederation between the two Germanys, but not a full
reunification,'' Rogers says.
   Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, points out that
German reunification is a sensitive question for the Soviets.
   ``Soviet policy is based upon preventing a reunified,
economically strong and certainly militarily strong Germany,''
Mitchell says. ``There must be some serious apprehension in the
Soviet Union today, because the events of the last couple of days
certainly has made reunification more likely.''
   The Bush administration says it does not foresee the dismantling
of NATO under any circumstances but, according to Hyland, the
reunification of Germany could mean the demise of the alliance.
   ``It may also mean the end of Western European unity, because
both have been based on a divided Germany and a divided Europe,''
Hyland says. ``If that comes to an end and 80 million Germans are
united in a confederation or a single state, it changes the entire
map of Europe.
   ``It changes all of the geopolitics and, in effect, ends the
period we've been in since ... the beginning of the war.''



 AP891202-0154 
AP-NR-12-02-89 0241EST
r i AM-Germany-NATO     12-02 0378
AM-Germany-NATO,0384
West German Leader Tries to Reassure U.S. Senators on NATO
With AM-East Germany
By TERRENCE PETTY
Associated Press Writer
BONN, West Germany (AP) 

   Chancellor Helmut Kohl assured
visiting U.S. senators on the eve of a superpower summit that West
Germany will not forsake NATO to reunite with East Germany, one of
the senators said Friday.
   ``He strongly affirmed under no circumstances would a reunified
Germany be neutral,'' Sen. Richard G. Lugar, head of the American
delegation, said of the Friday meeting with Kohl.
   Asked whether he thought the West Germans were committed to
staying in the NATO military alliance of Western nations, the
Indiana Republican said: ``Without any reservations.''
   There is growing discussion in West Germany about German
reunification as a result of sweeping social and political reforms
underway in East Germany. There has been speculation that West
Germany might someday be tempted to agree to neutrality if the
Kremlin stipulates it as the price for reunification.
   Kohl on Tuesday unveiled a 10-point proposal with German
reunification as its ultimate goal. But the Soviets, who suffered
millions of deaths fighting a unified Germany in World War II, have
said the idea of German reunification is ``dangerous and
unrealistic.''
   President Bush and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev are to
begin a shipboard summit off Malta on Saturday. The dramatic events
in East Germany and whirlwind reforms elsewhere in the East bloc
are likely to be a main topic of their talks.
   Lugar came to Bonn with eight other members of the U.S. Senate's
arms control observer group. He said the purpose of the trip was to
``visit with the Germans on their judgments about all of these
procedures that are going on.''
   U.S. Ambassador Vernon A. Walters joined the senators for their
75-minute closed-door talks with Kohl. The senators also met with
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Defense Minister
Gerhard Stoltenberg during the day.
   Lugar said Kohl told the Americans that reunification would be a
``procedure that depends on many events in Germany and Europe'' and
that the Soviet Union and the United States have a role to play.
   Lugar said of Kohl's proposals, ``There is much to work with
there with regard to the future of Germany and the future of the
(NATO) alliance.''



 AP891207-0158 
AP-NR-12-07-89 2156EST
r i AM-Poland-Germany     12-07 0419
AM-Poland-Germany,0433
Poland Says Any German Reunification Must Be Gradual
By JOHN DANISZEWSKI
Associated Press Writer
WARSAW, Poland (AP) 

   The government on Thursday allowed for the
possibility of a reunified Germany, but said such a state must be
formed gradually and respect Poland's borders.
   In the Solidarity government's first definitive statement on the
issue, Foreign Minister Krzysztof Skubiszewski told Parliament the
two German states could be joined as part of the process of uniting
Europe.
   He said German reunification ``cannot go ahead'' of the
reunification of Europe.
   ``A reunited Germany will not be created tomorrow or the day
after tomorrow,'' Skubiszewski said. ``Fears and concerns appearing
every now and then, including in Poland, are unjustified, although
alertness is recommended.''
   Asked about German reunification at a news conference in Gdansk,
Solidarity labor leader Lech Walesa said he prefers ``no political
changes in Europe, but there should be all kinds of economic
integrations.''
   Western European countries have agreed to form an economic union
by the end of 1992.
   Sweeping democratic reforms have taken hold in East Germany in
the past several weeks under the pressure of mass protests,
spurring talk of reuniting the two German states divided at the end
of World War II. West Germany has proposed a plan for greater
unity, but East German leaders reject reunification.
   The specter of a powerful, reunited Germany has troubed many
Poles, especially the older ones who recall the 1939 Nazi invasion
of Poland that began World War II.
   A reported surge in anti-Polish sentiment in East Germany in
recent weeks has heightened Polish anxieties.
   Skubiszewski's speech seemed designed to reassure Poles that the
government does not see unification in the near future and will
insist on Poland's current borders.
   Skubiszewski faulted West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
program for gradual German reunification, offered last week, for
not making clear that reunification would respect the existing
border between Poland and East Germany.
   Some right-wing West German politicians have called for
recovering the 40,000 square miles of territory that Germany lost
to Poland at the end of World War II. The territory is about
one-third of present-day Poland.
   East Germany and West Germany each separately has recognized the
border, but there has been no official assurance that a reunified
Germany would also acknowledge the border.
   ``One can only unite within established borders and without
territorial arguments,'' said Skubiszewski.
   He also said German reunification is unlikely as long as West
Germany belongs to NATO and East Germany to the Soviet-led Warsaw
Pact military alliance.



 AP891212-0062 
AP-NR-12-12-89 1148EST
u i PM-EastGermany 2ndLd-Writethru   12-12 0648
PM-East Germany, 2nd Ld-Writethru,a0502,0663
Party Admits Socialism Failed; Reunification Splits Democracy Movement
Eds: SUBS 3rd graf `Also today...' with 1 graf to UPDATE with Baker
meeting with Modrow. Pickup 4th graf `In another...'
LaserPhoto LEI2
By TONY CZUCZKA
Associated Press Writer
LEIPZIG, East Germany (AP) 

   The Communist Party today admitted
that East Germany's socialist system has failed, and expressed
support for a type of partnership with West Germany.
   The statement in the Communist Party newspaper Neues Deutschland
was one of the bluntest official assessments to date of the
country's increasingly troubled situation. It came a day after
shouting matches broke out over German reunification during
pro-democracy protests in Leipzig and Dresden.
   Also today, Secretary of State James A. Baker III urged caution
on the reunification issue. He visited the Berlin Wall and met with
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and East German Premier Hans
Modrow.
   In another development, the largest opposition movement, New
Forum, announced it will take part as a political party in the
country's first free elections, scheduled for May 6.
   Neues Deutschland, in proposing a new party platform, said
``socialism has definitely failed as a social system in our
country'' and acknowledged that the ``popular revolutionary
movement'' of the past weeks had led to the scrapping of the old
system.
   The paper repeated the Communists' promise to work for a new
``democratic socialism'' within a multi-party system.
   During the past few weeks, both Germanys have increased business
and cultural ties but have debated what labels to use for closer
relations, since the East Berlin government rejects calls for
reunification.
   Neues Deutschland urged a ``qualified partnership of both German
states'' but rejected any suggestions of resolving the ``German
question.''
   During Monday's demonstrations that drew more than 200,000
protesters, the largest of them the now-weekly rally in the
southern city of Leipzig, speakers warned that the reunification
issue could fracture the popular movement that has forced the
ruling Communists into swift retreat.
   One sign said ``Germany United Fatherland,'' using a phrase from
the West German national anthem.
   Others, opposing reunification, urged ``No Fourth Reich'' and no
transformation of East Germany into West Germany's ``plantation.''
   ADN said 40,000 people demonstrated for reunification in
Karl-Marx-Stadt, while several thousand people split into pro- and
anti-reunification groups at a rally in Dresden.
   Smaller rallies were also reported by ADN in Schwerin, Potsdam,
Neubrandenburg and Halle. The agency did not say if reunification
played a role in those protests.
   The rallies came shortly after the four victorious World War II
Allies met in West Berlin to discuss the latest developments in
East Germany and Berlin _ the divided city that they still
technically administer.
   The meeting brought together officials of the United States,
France and Britain with Soviet officials, who have increasingly
expressed concern over calls in both Germanys to reunite the
country.
   Kohl has advocated a confederation of the two Germanys, to be
followed by eventual reunification. But he stressed to reporters on
Monday that ``the goal of our policies is not to create an
overpowering Germany in the middle of Europe.'' The West German
leader advocates a reunified Germany that would respect the
security needs _ and borders _ of the rest of Europe.
   Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, during a Central
Committee in Moscow on Saturday, urged the West not to try to
influence developments in East Germany. East Germany is a front
line of defense for the Soviets, who have nearly 400,000 troops in
the country.
   ADN said Gorbachev would meet soon with Gregor Gysi, a reformer
who was chosen East German Communist Party chief on Saturday.
   Gysi's rise followed the ouster of two sets of Communist
leaders. Since East Germans began agitating for an end to Communist
domination two months ago, public pressure has forced the opening
of the Berlin Wall and pushed the Communists to promise free
elections and relinquish their political monopoly.



 AP900130-0202 
AP-NR-01-30-90 2203EST
u i AM-Soviet-Germany 1stLd-Writethru a0634 01-30 0637
AM-Soviet-Germany, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0634,0655
Gorbachev Leaves Door Open to German Reunification
Eds: INSERT 3 grafs after 17th graf, According to ... UPDATING
with Lambsdorff remarks. Picks up 18th, `Modrow invited...
With AM-East Germany, Bjt
By ANDREW KATELL
Associated Press Writer
MOSCOW (AP) 

   President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met Tuesday with
East German Premier Hans Modrow and appeared to be more open toward
eventual German reunification.
   Modrow told reporters after the meeting that Gorbachev ``did not
rule out such a prospect in the future, and at the same time did
not venture to set some time limits for that.''
   Earlier, the Kremlin chief said any such decisions must include
the four Allied powers and take into account European opinions.
   ``The development of events in the world, in East Germany, in
the Soviet Union demand deep consideration and an analytical
approach to deciding this problem,'' he said in remarks reported by
the official news agency Tass.
   ``Time itself is acting on this process, giving it dynamism,''
Gorbachev said. ``We have to act responsibly and not decide this
important question on the streets.''
   Tass said Gorbachev emphasized that talks about restructuring
relations between the two Germanys must involve ``all directly
interested governments.''
   Asked by an East German correspondent about his attitude toward
reunification, Gorbachev said the question was not unexpected and
that ``no one can cast doubt'' on the reasonableness of asking it.
   However, the English-language Tass translation indicated
Gorbachev could have meant there were no doubts about reunification
itself.
   Gorbachev's position was similar to that adopted by Communists
in East Berlin on Tuesday. For the first time, the Communists
acknowledged German unity as a long-term goal but said it must be
imbedded in the process of overcoming Europe's overall divisions.
   The Soviet Union traditionally has strongly opposed any talk of
German reunification, but Gorbachev has softened that position in
adopting a policy that has allowed radical reform in Eastern Europe.
   Soviets say the question of German reunification is to be
decided in the future.
   Gorbachev, in comments to reporters after meeting French
President Francois Mitterrand in Kiev in December, reiterated his
view that the existence of two German states is a fact based on the
outcome of World War II.
   But he added, ``The present situation is the result of specific
historical events, a specific historical process on this continent.
So, history should decide the future of this continent.''
   ``I don't think it is a topical question today. A different
approach may create a situation that would complicate the entire
European process, including the relations between the two German
states,'' Gorbachev said.
   Modrow said the two Germanys could work toward confederation in
phases with no time limit.
   He said he agreed with Gorbachev that reunification must be
decided not only by East and West Germany, but all of Europe.
   According to Tass, the Soviet leader said any action on
reunification must not infringe on the interests of either East or
West Germany, the four Allied powers: France, Britain, the United
States or the Soviet Union, or anyone else in Europe.
   Count Otto Lambsdorff, head of West Germany's Free Democratic
Party, a partner in the governing coalition, said Tuesday in London
that Gorbachev has adopted ``a more positive attitude'' toward
German reunification.
   In a TV interview on Britain's Channel 4, he also urged
``economic union'' within 18 months as a prelude to full union of
West and East Germany.
   Lambsdorff said that because of East Germany's political
instability it had only two choices _ unification or chaos.
   Modrow invited Gorbachev and Premier Nikolai I. Ryzhkov to visit
East Germany and they accepted, Tass reported.
   Modrow arrived in Moscow late Monday. A Communist, he has moved
forward the country's first free elections from May to March 18 and
brought the opposition into a coalition that will govern until then.



 AP900131-0068 
AP-NR-01-31-90 0930EST
r i PM-EastGermany     01-31 0584
PM-East Germany,0602
West Germans Praise Gorbachev's Comments on Reunification
By TERRENCE PETTY
Associated Press Writer
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   West German officials and media today praised
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev for softening his view on
German reunification and said it could give hope to disheartened
East Germans.
   Disgraced former Communist Party leader Erich Honecker was
released from prison Tuesday night after justice officials
determined he was too frail to withstand the rigors of imprisonment
while awaiting trial on treason charges.
   Gorbachev said Tuesday in Moscow that he believed one Germany
was likely in the future, but he added that Germans ``should not
decide this important question on the streets.''
   He referred to the growing number of demonstrations in East
Germany in support of reunification.
   Gorbachev's statement was his most tolerant yet on the subject
of a single Germany, which has been opposed by Communists for more
than 40 years. East German Communists on Tuesday endorsed for
reunification for the first time.
   In West Germany, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher told
West German Radio that Gorbachev had ``correctly analyzed'' the
situation and again shown his political skill.
   West German officials and media praised Gorbachev's view as
``realistic'' and described it as an important sign of hope for
East Germans who have lost faith in their government.
   Communist leaders launched their uphill campaign for March 18
parliamentary elections with a news conference to unveil their
``European concept'' that aims for a united and demilitarized
Europe.
   Party ideologist Peter Brie said the Communists support ``the
togetherness of the German nation,'' and urged a thoughtful and
measured approach to reunification.
   In an interview with the West German Bild newspaper, party
leader Gregor Gysi complained that the reunification drive is
moving too quickly.
   Asked if the Communists oppose reunification, Gysi told the
newspaper: ``No, not at all. This process cannot be stopped any
more. But it is irresponsible to do things in such a way now as if
it were possible tomorrow.''
   The reunification issue promises to dominate the election
campaign that will seat a new leadership in less than seven weeks.
   Increasing numbers of East Germans have demonstrated for union
with wealthy and prosperous West Germany as their own economy
tumbles and an exodus of skilled workers continues unchecked.
   More than 340,000 people fled East Germany last year, having
lost hope that their spartan living conditions would improve. The
devastating flight has included as many as 2,500 people daily since
Jan. 1.
   The Communists are widely distrusted because of corruption
scandals that have surfaced since the peaceful pro-democracy revolt
last fall, and because they carry the blame for leading East
Germany into its current economic and political crises.
   The man most blamed for the country's problems, Honecker, was
set free after an East Berlin court rejected a request that he be
kept in prison until his trial in March. He was jailed Monday.
   The court decided that ``despite the severity of the charges
against Honecker, the state of the accused's health does not permit
imprisonment,'' the official ADN news agency reported.
   A spokesman for Chief Prosecutor Hans-Juergen Joseph promised
that the investigation against Honecker would proceed.
   ADN said the court acted on advice from two doctors who examined
Honecker independently. Honecker, 77, underwent surgery on Jan. 8
to remove a malignant kidney tumor.
   Honecker was ousted from the leadership on Oct. 18, after
massive pro-democracy demonstrations. He was expelled from the
Communist Party in December and has since been accused of treason
and abusing his power.



 AP900210-0106 
AP-NR-02-10-90 1607EST
r i AM-EastGermany     02-10 0419
AM-East Germany,0434
Thousands Demonstrate for Unification
With AM-Germany-Soviet, Bjt
By NESHA STARCEVIC
Associated Press Writer
WEST BERLIN (AP) 

   About 20,000 East Germans, many carrying West
German flags, demonstrated Saturday for speedy German
reunification, the official East German news agency ADN said.
   As the demonstrators rallied in the southern city of Plauen,
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said in Moscow that Soviet
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had given him an unequivocal promise
to respect German reunification. Kohl declared it a ``very good day
for Germany.''
   Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher also disclosed
that they expect a reunification plan with agreement of the World
War II Allies to be ready before the end of the year for
presentation to a pan-European summit meeting.
   Calls for German reunification have increased since the ouster
of the hard-line Communist leadership and the opening of East
Germany's borders during the fall pro-democracy movement.
   Despite reforms, nearly 2,000 East Germans, most of them skilled
workers, continue to leave their homeland daily, crippling an
economy already troubled by strikes and absenteeism.
   Earlier Saturday, West German Finance Minister Theo Waigel said
the East German economy was in a ``sorrowful state'' and urged the
East German government to release details on its financial
situation.
   Waigel's comments came after a day after a high-ranking official
in Bonn warned that East Germany is rapidly approaching insolvency.
   ``Things are escalating,'' Waigel said in an interview with West
Berlin radio. ``The economy is in a sorrowful state. The political
authority is crumbling.''
   He said the Bonn government believes East Germany's foreign debt
stands at $18 billion.
   ``If the situation has changed, the East German government must
say so,'' said Waigel, a conservative who has been pushing for
establishment of a common currency for the two states.
   Also Saturday, more than 100 East Germans protested in front of
the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin against the stationing of Soviet
helicopters in their country, ADN said.
   ADN said the demonstrators held signs saying ``Gorbi, what about
disarmament?'' and ``Tanks out, helicopters in?''
   The protesters, from the East German town of Prenzlau, claimed
the Soviets had backed out of disarmament plans by replacing a tank
unit that had been stationed at a military base there with
helicopters, ADN reported.
   According to ADN, the demonstrators, who came from church and
citizens' groups as well as from the town council, issued a
statement calling for civilian use of the base.
   Prenzlau, a town of 22,000, is located about 50 miles north of
Berlin.



 AP900214-0157 
AP-NR-02-14-90 1927EST
r w AM-Germany-Holocaust     02-14 0385
AM-Germany-Holocaust,360
Jewish Leader Seeks to Discuss Reunification with Germans
With AM-The German Question, Bjt
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   The chairman of the Simon Wisenthal Center has
asked to meet with the leaders of West and East Germany to discuss
``the great fear that German reunification brings to the community
of victims of Nazism.''
   ``I must tell you I am not among those in the cheering section
applauding the rush towards German reunification,'' Rabbi Marvin
Hier wrote Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and Prime
Minister Hans Modrow of East Germany.
   ``However, if that is the inevitable course, let us at least
place on record our concerns,'' he said.
   Hier is the founder of the center, headquartered in Los Angeles,
which seeks to keep alive the memory of the Nazi persecution of
Jews in Germany and Nazi-conquered lands.
   In nearly identical letters, he asked to meet with Kohl during
his forthcoming trip to Washington and with Modrow in Germany next
month. The letters were made available Wednsday to The Associated
Press.
   ``You are undoubtedly aware,'' he wrote both leaders, ``of the
great fear that German reunification brings to the community of
victims of Nazism.''
   ``It is not an irrational fear of the kind that one explains
away as the nightmares of victims who remain locked into their past
and lose all perspective of present reality.
   ``The fears are real because those who bear the scars of the
last `unified Germany' do not see their concerns being addressed in
the current reunification discussions betwen world leaders.''
   Hier listed 10 points he wanted to raise. Among them were a
program to teach German schoolchildren about the annhilation of the
Jews; the creation of an agency to monitor and prosecute hate
groups; the continuation of the ``special relationship'' now
existing between West Germany and Israel; the convening of a 1992
conference of world leaders on the 50th anniversary of the
conference at which ``the final solution'' was developed; the
establisment of a German commission to protect Holocaust sites; the
banning of terrorist organizations that ``have enjoyed
respectablity in East Germany;'' a cultural exchange program
between German and Jewish organizations; German television and
radio programs on the reconciliation; restitution payments to the
families and victims of Nazism, and a German commitment to
revitalize former synagogues in East German territory.



 AP900215-0013 
AP-NR-02-15-90 0229EST
r w PM-TheGermanQuestion Bjt   02-15 0800
PM-The German Question, Bjt,790
A Single Germany: No Fear of Jackboots, But Worries Nonetheless
By MIKE FEINSILBER
Associated Press Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   Historians say the world need not fear that
German jackboots will echo again on European pavements, but some
still see the rush toward German reunification as a setback _ a
step away from the integration of Europe.
   For the most part, the historians say an East Germany collapsing
into chaos represents a greater threat to stability than a united
German state.
   ``The West Germans are moving ahead not out of nationalistic
fervor, but a perceived need to deal with a crisis,'' said Henry
Ashby Turner of Yale, author of ``The Two Germanies Since 1945.''
   ``There is no such a thing as indelible national character,''
Turner said. ``I don't think there is any chance that the young men
of Germany are going to slip out of their Adidas running shoes and
pull on jackboots and start running around saying, `Heil!''
   He was one of several experts in German history discussing the
implications of reunification following the decision Tuesday by the
four World War II allies _ the United States, Britain, France and
the Soviet Union _ to accept the reunification of a Germany they
divided 45 years ago.
   University of Chicago historian Michael Geyer, a native of
Germany, said he feared the creation of a ``strong, sovereign
nation in the center of Europe'' could reverse a more important
development _ the 40-year drive toward an integrated Europe in
which industries, banks, trade unions and even government
ministries have been collaborating across borders.
   ``The East German state is collapsing,'' said Geyer. ``So
something has to happen very dramatically. But they have a choice _
the Europeans and Germans and Americans. Do they want to opt for
the European card or for the German card? I think they are opting
for the German card.''
   ``I hear these days very little about what Gorbachev called `the
house of Europe,''' he said.
   The result of a dominant ``uncomfortably strong'' German state,
Geyer added, could be a setback to the diminishment of national
borders. It could also mean, he said, that American troops might
have to stay in Europe as a counterweight to Germany.
   ``If I had my druthers reunifications would have happened after
1992, after the integration of the West German economy into the
economy of Western Europe,'' said Charles J. Herber of George
Washington University, expressing similar concern.
   ``Then there would have been fewer chances for German
adventurers,'' he said.
   West Germans were aware of their European neighbors' misgivings,
said Richard Breitman of American University, and so they presented
reunification within the context of European integration. They
wanted to avoid arousing fear of a united Germany again dominating
Europe.
   ``Even if the history did not exist, there would be fears of
that kind,'' he said. ``We're dealing not just with rational
calculation but a whole host of emotional memories.''
   For all that, Breitman said, ``One Germany is not only
inevitable, but given the successful record of West Germany over
the last 40 years, my feeling is it is better than having a regime
in chaos.''
   ``The only alternative to reunification,'' added Turner, is an
East Germany in ruins, ``a basket case, a Bangladesh of Europe.''
   He said Germans have ``no significant interest in territorial
revisions. Those misgivings are misplaced.''
   Gerhard Weinberg of the University of North Carolina, considered
a leading historian of the Nazi era, cautioned that reunification,
if mishandled, could prove explosive.
   While the people of West Europe have gotten over nationalistic
distrusts, East Europeans, living in closed societies, have not, he
said, and fear of Germany is a reality in East Europe and Russia,
he said.
   ``I don't think the Germans are heading for Moscow again, but we
have to give people _ and the Germans have to give people _ time to
think this through and get used to it. ... Mishandled,
reunification could scare one or the other of the participants into
starting something and scare others and goodness knows where it
would end.''
   Gordon Craig, emeritus professor at Stanford, said the division
of Germany has been the basis of a peace settlement ``which worked
pretty well'' but was ``abnormal and sooner or later had to be
corrected.''
   German reunification, said Craig, gives the world the chance to
build a new international system, one that ``will prevent the use
of international violence.''
   He added, ``We have to be careful that we don't fall back into
the kind of system that existed before the Second World War, a
Europe filled with nations that were suffering various grievances,
rivalries, disputed frontiers, driven by what they considered to be
legitimate reasons but pitted against each other _ the sort of
things that gave rise to Hitler in 1933.''



 AP900321-0057 
AP-NR-03-21-90 0648EST
r a PM-Jews-Reunification     03-21 0347
PM-Jews-Reunification,0356
Jewish Leaders To Meet in Berlin on German Reunification
By CATHERINE CROCKER
Associated Press Writer
NEW YORK (AP) 

   The Berlin villa where the Nazi leadership met
to implement the ``final solution'' against Europe's Jewish
population will be the site of a World Jewish Congress conference
on German reunification.
   The New York-based organization announced Tuesday that the
meeting is scheduled for May 8, the 45th anniversary of V-E Day.
   ``The world is expecting a Jewish statement on reunification,''
said Edgar Bronfman, the president of the World Jewish Congress.
   ``I think that the place where they decided on the `final
solution' is the right place to have such a meeting, and the
anniversary of the victory in Europe seems to be the right day.''
   Some 100 members of the World Jewish Congress from about 70
countries will attend the conference at the villa in Wannsee,
Berlin, where on Jan. 20, 1942, high German government and party
officials adopted a plan to exterminate the Jews.
   ``Jews have a right to state a moral position on German
reunification and we will make a moral statement. And part of that
moral statement is to see that it (the Holocaust) doesn't happen
again,'' Bronfman said.
   In the long run, he said, a united Germany can be ``a very
positive thing'' for Europe, but certain precautions must be taken
to prevent a repeat of history. For example, Germany's borders
``must be sealed in cement,'' and the country should not be allowed
nuclear weapons, he said.
   Bronfman said he does not fear a resurgence of anti-Semitism
once the two Germanys are united. In fact, he said, reunification
might cause a decline in anti-Jewish feelings.
   ``Now that reunification is about to be a fact, they won't be
blaming the Jews'' for a divided Germany, Bronfman explained.
   The conference will convene May 6 and a formal declaration on
German reunification will be issued May 8. It will be the first
meeting ever held on German soil by the World Jewish Congress,
which was founded in 1936 in response to Hitler's threats against
Jews.



FT923-6509
_AN-CHZBBACDFT
920824


FT  24 AUG 92 / Letter: The Bundesbank is led to the dock


   From Mr HOWARD FLIGHT


Sir, The argument for an independent central bank is that it should be free
of party political interference, not that it should conduct monetary policy
without regard to national, regional or global interests.
Whatever policy the Kohl government followed over reunification, it was
bound to unleash a large federal deficit and inflationary pressures in
Germany. As the western German population is now aware, German reunification
needs a strong, growing west German economy to finance the subsidisation of
eastern Germans' living standards until there is a sustained upswing in the
east - even if at the cost of higher German inflation than the Bundesbank
would wish.
In Europe as a whole, very high real interest rates threaten to turn
recession into depression. The governments of Europe have been remarkably
patient with the Bundesbank, although it is threatening nearly 10 years of
European effort for greater economic and political integration. Surely there
must be compromise of some economic habits to achieve the latter?
It is ironic that, just when German reunification presented a short-term
reason for Germany to shift its anti-inflationary economic and monetary
priorities, accommodating European convergence, Bundesbank intransigence is
threatening the EMU commitment.
Beyond Europe, the dominant economic forces are strongly disinflationary.
But Germany is the one economy which, for reasons of reunification, could
afford a more relaxed stand on the inflationary front.
Yet Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank's chief economist, advises there are no
grounds for a cut in Germany's interest rates. This, despite the
unreliability of German money supply data.
The German government might point out to the Bundesbank that monetary
targets might be achievable only at the cost of many more than 3m unemployed
in Germany, of the destruction of the EMU programme and global depression.
A DM exchange rate adjustment within the ERM is not the answer to the
problems. We need a prolonged low-interest-rate German reunification boom.
The European currency bloc is overvalued against the dollar and yen as a
result of Bundesbank interest rate policies. And this is aggravating
recession.
A future European-wide central bank must clearly - like the US Federal
Reserve - be more accountable in the broader European political and economic
interest.
The governments and central banks of Europe and the G7 block - including the
Kohl administration - should pressurise the Bundesbank, and be prepared to
consider constitutional changes if necessary, to halt this idiocy.
Howard Flight,
managing director,
Guinness Flight
Global Asset Management,
Lighterman's Court,
5 Gainsford Street,
Tower Bridge,
London SE1 2NE

The Financial Times


London Page 11



 LA021290-0043 
 175174 


February 12, 1990, Monday, Home Edition 




Part A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk 




461 words 




'WAY IS FREE' FOR GERMAN REUNIFICATION, KOHL SAYS 




By WILLIAM TUOHY, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




BONN 




West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl declared on his return from Moscow on Sunday 
that "the way is now free" for German reunification. 


His meeting with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev convinced him, he told 
West German radio, that the two German states should "enter into negotiations 
as quickly as possible" after the March 18 East German election. 


Kohl will meet with East German Prime Minister Hans Modrow on Tuesday and 
Wednesday in Bonn to discuss immediate steps in economic cooperation, including 
monetary union, to prevent the collapse of the faltering East German economy. 


"Political and economic union go hand in hand," Kohl said. 


He said that immediate steps must be taken on the economic front to "stop the 
hemorrhage of East Germans to the Federal Republic and keep them in their 
heimat," or home, in East Germany. 


Kohl said that his talks with Gorbachev -- who told him that reunification is a 
matter for the Germans themselves to decide -- could lead to an "economic 
breakthrough" in East Germany, which in turn could provide a "push forward" for 
all of Europe. 


Asked how soon the two Germanys could merge, Kohl declared that the March 
election has to come first, and "then I think it will all go very quickly." 


The chancellor said that almost all of the political parties and opposition 
groups in East Germany now support reunification. And after the election, he 
said, "they will want to put their programs into practice quickly." 


Gorbachev inquired about plans by West German politicians to campaign in East 
Germany, Kohl said, adding that the Soviet leader did not appear to be upset 
about such political activity. 


West Germany's Social Democratic Party is expected to campaign heavily in East 
Germany in support of a fledging branch of the party that has taken a 
surprisingly strong lead in public opinion polls. 


Major members of the party, including former Chancellor Willy Brandt, are 
scheduled to appear at rallies on behalf of the East German Social Democrats. 


With the surge of the East German Social Democrats, political analysts are 
pointing to the strange role they could play in the ultimate political fate of 
Kohl. 


Ever since reunification became a blazing issue, Kohl's standing in West German 
opinion polls has risen, and if the national elections, now scheduled for 
December, were held today, he would have a good chance of leading his Christian 
Democratic Union to victory. 


But if the two Germanys are fused before the West Germany election in December, 
the growing number of Social Democratic voters in what today is East Germany -- 
who would presumably be allowed to vote in December -- could easily tip the 
balance away from the Christian Democrats, pushing Kohl out of the government 
leadership. 




KOHL, HELMUT; REUNIFICATION; EAST GERMANY -- FOREIGN RELATIONS -- WEST GERMANY; 
USSR -- FOREIGN RELATIONS -- WEST GERMANY; GORBACHEV, MIKHAIL S 




 WSJ890922-0113 
 = 890922 
 890922-0113. 
 East German Exodus Sparks Discussion
@  On the Possibility of Reuniting Germany
@  ----
@  By Terence Roth
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal 
 09/22/89 
 WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) 
 EUROP FREST 
 FRANKFURT, West Germany  

   The mass emigration of thousands of disaffected East Germans has rekindled reunification talk in West Germany, where some legislators plan to begin exploring the possiblity of reuniting the two Germanys. 

   No one is predicting a date for a possible reunification. 
Proponents acknowledge the risks of assuming too much of East Bloc reform trends, and most hedge their thoughts with careful references to Washington and Moscow. 
Yet growing signs of ferment in East Germany have given Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government reason to consider the possibilities. 

   Eduard Lintner, parliamentary speaker on German affairs for the joint Christian Democrat and Christrian Socialist caucus in the Bundestag, said his committee has placed reunification on its October agenda. 
He said the sessions, which will include government officials and outside experts, hopefully can devise reunification models to discuss with West Germany's Western allies, particularly the U.S. 

   "It has become clear to the world that the Communist system in East Germany is in trouble," Mr. Lintner said. 
"The time has come for us to show our allies, but also reform-minded people in the East, that German reunification is no longer just a theory but a subject requiring a serious appraisal of how it could come about." 

   "There are still a number of imponderables," Mr. Linter conceded. 
"For instance, we want the federal government to approach our allies and get their thoughts on the reunification topic." 

   The U.S. ambassador to Bonn, Vernon A. Walters, earlier this month reaffirmed Washington's policy of supporting a German reunification based on free, democratic elections. 
But Mr. Walters caused a stir by predicting that reunion could occur in the relatively near future. 

   Emerging opposition to uncompromising Communist rule in East Germany has raised questions on how long East Berlin's leaders can resist the democratic reforms sweeping through neighboring East Bloc countries. 
Reforms in Poland, Hungary and even the Soviet Union have magnified East Germany's Stalinist controls. 
Fledgling protest groups, and the influential Protestant church, have begun pressing for reforms in East Germany which, if allowed to include free elections, could eventually lead to a reunited Germany, according to some Western experts. 

   Dorothee Wilms, Bonn's cabinet minister for inter-German affairs, said in an interview in the newspaper Welt am Sonntag that recent polls show that between 85% and 90% of all West Germans favor a reunifed Germany. 

   "The desire for reunification, a feeling of togetherness, a sense of nationhood -- all this has strongly increased in recent years," Ms. Wilms told the newspaper. 
"The recent escape movement from the DDR makes especially clear that people of both German states want to live free amongst themselves," she said, but cautioned that reunification cannot occur overnight. 
The first step, she added, "is the reform process in the DDR." 

   Most West German governments since 1949 have paid only lip service to the reunification goal set down in the preamble of West Germany's constitution. 
Political realities have prevented the topic from becoming a serious issue. 
Analysts say that four decades of different systems would make reunification difficult. 
Further, many West German workers worry that a mass influx of East Germans could threaten their jobs. 

   Thousands of East Germans have emigrated to West Germany over the Austro-Hungarian border since Budapest ignored East Berlin's protests and opened its border. 
Close to 80,000 East German refugees have arrived in West Germany so far this year, either legally or by escaping, and a total of more than 100,000 are expected by December. 

   The Soviets have joined East Berlin in criticizing Bonn for welcoming the East German refugees, and chided Hungary for violating an emigration treaty with East Germany by allowing them to leave. 

   Moscow, which has tolerated reforms elsewhere in the East Bloc, is said to be concerned by conditions in East Germany, perhaps the most important of its Warsaw Pact satellites. 
Unconfirmed West German intelligence reports appearing in the West German media said Moscow fears a growing dissident movement and mass demonstrations in East Germany by next year. 

   Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev accepted an invitation to attend East Germany's 40th anniversary celebration, providing an opportunity for serious discussions with Erich Honecker, East Berlin's ailing party leader. 

   East Germany's Communist leadership, commented the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, "has no illusions as to why Gorbachev is honoring their 40th anniversary. 
He certainly will not say 'well done, keep it up.'" 




 AP900103-0077 
AP-NR-01-03-90 1240EDT
r i AM-Honecker     01-03 0311
AM-Honecker,0322
Report Honecker May be Moved to Monastery For His Safety
With AM-East Germany, Bjt
HAMBURG, West Germany (AP) 

   Former East German leader Erich
Honecker may be moved to a monastery to protect him from a possible
lynching by enraged citizens, a newspaper said Wednesday.
   In a front-page story, the mass-circulation Bild newspaper said
``Lynch Danger _ Church Wants to Grant Honecker Asylum.''
   Since Honecker was ousted Oct. 18, the former Communist Party
leader and other party officials have come under investigation for
charges of corruption and living in luxury at the cost of the state.
   In December, seven former Politburo members were arrested, and
Honecker was placed under house arrest in the government housing
area of Wandlitz outside East Berlin.
   The Wandlitz homes, including the one in which Honecker still
lives, are being converted to a medical rehabilitation center for
children. Honecker is expected to be forced out of the compound in
February.
   Bild said it had information that ``Lutheran and Catholic church
sources have offered Honecker _ who is threated by public rage _
protection and refuge.''
   ``This is the only possibility to protect Erich Honecker from
the rage of the East German people,'' Bild quoted the source as
saying.
   It was the churches that became the venues for gathering of
pro-democracy groups that eventually brought the overthrow of his
18-year leadership.
   In recent weeks, East German groups have called for punishing
Honecker and for moving him to smaller quarters ``with an outside
toilet,'' Bild said.
   The current leadership fears that in such a situation, Honecker
``might be attacked and become a victim of lynch justice,'' Bild
said.
   Honecker, 77, underwent gall-bladder surgery in August, and East
German media reported he remains seriously ill.
   ``Sources say the ailing ex-leader may be placed in a
church-operated home for the elderly, or even in a monastery,''
Bild reported.



 AP900118-0029 
AP-NR-01-18-90 0329EST
r i PM-EastGermany-Honecker     01-18 0544
PM-East Germany-Honecker,0562
Honecker's Final Weeks In Power Described
With PM-East Germany
By KEVIN COSTELLOE
Associated Press Writer
WEST BERLIN (AP) 

   As protests gathered strength last fall, East
Germany's longtime orthodox leader Erich Honecker ``lost touch with
reality,'' according to the man who succeeded him as Communist
leader only to be ousted later.
   Egon Krenz, the successor, and former Politburo member Guenter
Schabowski on Wednesday gave their versions of the bunker mentality
that engulfed the hard-liners toward the end.
   ``There was the notion in the former party leadership that
everything outside of planned events and demonstrations staged by
the Communist youth group was an action organized by enemy
forces,'' Krenz told an investigating commission in East Berlin.
   The testimony was broadcast on East German television.
   Schabowski said Honecker had personally ordered police attacks
against demonstrators in early October, working closely with his
then-secret police chief, Erich Mielke.
   ``Honecker took things into his own hands,'' Schabowski said.
``All decisions and orders that led to the police actions against
demonstrators and to their arrrest went exclusively through
Honecker and Mielke.''
   Like Krenz, Schabowski denied any personal responsibility for
the orders to attack the demonstrators in the capital.
   The attempts at suppression were engineered by Honecker and
Mielke, bypassing the other 19 members of the ruling Politburo,
Krenz insisted.
   ``Then-general secretary Erich Honecker and the internal
security chief Erich Mielke immediately after each session of the
Politburo consulted with each other on the security situation of
the German Democratic Republic,'' Krenz said.
   Honecker and Mielke are now targeted for an indictment for high
treason.
   The East Berlin city government commission is probing possible
criminal charges stemming from police brutality during the October
attacks in the capital.
   Club-swinging riot police brutally beat demonstrators on Oct. 7
and 8, when Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev was in town to
commemorate the country's 40th anniversary. The uprising was a
turning point that speeded Honecker's downfall 10 days later.
   Krenz, who had responsibility for many internal security
functions before Honecker's ouster, criticized the use of force
during his testimony Wednesday.
   ``The excessive action of law enforcement authorities was
neither politically nor morally justifiable,'' he told the panel,
speaking confidently and wearing a gray suit.
   Krenz, who was thrown out six weeks after succeeding Honecker on
Oct. 18, insisted he knew nothing about any orders to shoot
demonstrators. Numerous news media accounts have said Honecker
either planned or issued such orders.
   Krenz said he accepted ``joint responsibility for misjudging
dissident citizens and dissident groups for years.''
   ``From today's viewpoint it is incomprehensible that there was
no general Politburo discussion about the negative developments
then taking place in society,'' said Krenz, an influential
Politburo member even before Honecker's fall.
   Krenz added that he and other then-members of the Politburo
failed to realize that the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches
were ``not working against but rather for the German Democratic
Republic.''
   ``Honecker had lost touch with reality and had unrealistic
perspectives,'' Krenz said of his one-time patron, who for years
treated him like a son.
   Honecker has been in ill health following gallbladder surgery
last summer. He was recently operated on for a malignant kidney
tumor.
   Krenz's current occupation has not been publicized, following
his fall as party chief on Dec. 3.



 AP900129-0036 
AP-NR-01-29-90 0413EST
u i BC-HoneckerArrested 1stLd-Writethru a0462 01-29 0275
BC-Honecker Arrested, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0462,0277
Honecker Arrested, Taken to Prison
Eds: UPDATES with physician saying Honecker still not well enough
to be jailed, unclear if prison has hospital unit. No pickup.
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker, who
is expected to be indicted for high treason, was arrested Monday
morning upon release from a hospital and taken to prison, the
official news agency ADN said.
   The news agency said the 77-year-old Honecker was arrested after
being released from East Berlin's Charite hospital, where he had
undergone surgery for a malignant kidney tumor.
   Honecker was immediately taken to East Berlin's Rummelsburg
prison, the brief dispatch said. Honecker joins other members of
his ousted Politburo already in prison awaiting trial.
   Earlier this month, East German prosecutors said Honecker and
former state security chief Erich Mielke would be charged with
treason and corruption charges for misuse of their positions and
state funds.
   Honecker, the aging hard-line Stalinist leader who ruled East
Germany for 18 years until his ouster on Oct. 18, had previously
been declared too ill to withstand imprisonment.
   ADN said that the director of Charite urology clinic, Dr. Peter
Althaus, repeated on Monday that in his opinion Honecker was still
not well enough to be jailed.
   On Sunday, West Germany's mass-circulation Bild newspaper said
Honecker would be arrested, but that he would be held at a prison
hospital because of his condition. ADN made not mention if
Rummelsburg prison was equipped with a medical facility.
   Earlier this month, East Germany's Luthern Church had offered to
put Honecker up in a home for the aged upon his release from the
hospital.



 AP900129-0071 
AP-NR-01-29-90 1223EST
u i PM-Honecker 2ndLd-Writethru   01-29 0445
PM-Honecker, 2nd Ld - Writethru,a0509,0454
Ousted East German Leader Arrested And Jailed
Eds: LEADS with 9 grafs to UPDATE with Honecker to be tried in
March, four associates also to be tried; picks up 11th pvs, `East
Germany...'
With PM-East Germany, Bjt
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker was
arrested and taken to prison today, and a prosecutor said he will
tried for high treason in March.
   Honecker, 77, was detained after his release from East Berlin's
Charite hospital, where he had undergone surgery for a malignant
kidney tumor, the official ADN news agency said.
   Chief Prosecutor Hans-Juergen Joseph told Parliament that
Honecker and former Politburo members Erich Mielke, Guenter Mittag
and Joachim Herrmann would be tried by the Supreme Court on treason
charges in March. All four have been expelled from the party.
   Mielke was Honecker's security chief, Mittag oversaw the economy
and Herrmann headed the party's propaganda department. Eleven
members of Honecker's ousted Politburo already are in prison
awaiting trial.
   Honecker's lawyer, Wolfgang Vogel, asked the chief prosecutor to
free the former leader from Rummelburg prison based on a doctor's
statement that he is too ill to stay in jail, ADN said. Vogel is
East Germany's most prominent lawyer.
   One of Honecker's doctors, Horst Vogler, said the former leader
was ``very depressed'' and his mental state ``impaired'' following
two major surgical operations since August.
   West German television showed an impassive Honecker being led
out of the hospital by his wife, Margot, in pre-dawn darkness. She
kissed him goodbye before he was taken away in a large limousine.
   Honecker's daughter, son-in-law and youngest grandchild also
came to see him off at the hospital, ADN quoted Vogler as saying.
   The charge of high treason carries a maximum life imprisonment.
The conviction used to carry the death penalty, but that was
abolished in reforms that followed Honecker's ouster Oct. 18.
   East Germany has been caught up in a virtual frenzy to root out
corruption and abuse of office.
   Honecker, the aging hard-line Stalinist leader who ruled East
Germany for 18 years, had previously been declared too ill to
withstand imprisonment.
   ADN said the director of Charite urology clinic, Dr. Peter
Althaus, repeated today that in his opinion Honecker is still not
well enough to be jailed.
   On Sunday, West Germany's mass-circulation Bild newspaper said
Honecker would be arrested but that he would be held at a prison
hospital because of his condition. ADN did not say whether
Rummelsburg prison is equipped with a medical facility.
   Earlier this month, East Germany's Luthern Church had offered to
put Honecker up in a home for the aged upon his release from the
hospital.



 AP900730-0116 
AP-NR-07-30-90 2101EDT
r i AM-Honecker     07-30 0279
AM-Honecker,0287
Panel: Honecker Unfit to be Held but Fit to be Tried
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   East Germany's deposed Communist leader Erich
Honecker is too sick to be held in jail but is fit enough to be
tried, the official news agency ADN reported Monday.
   ADN, quoting a Health Ministry statement, said Honecker was
still recovering from surgery for kidney cancer in January and was
not well enough to be incarcerated.
   But a medical exam by a team of doctors found him in condition
to be questioned and to stand trial, ADN said.
   Honecker, 77, ruled East Germany for 19 years until he was
ousted in October as a wave of pro-democracy demonstrations swept
the country, leading to the peaceful overthrow of the Communist
government and the opening of the Berlin Wall.
   The medical panel concluded that seven other former Communist
officials, who had been among Honecker's closest aides, were all
fit to prosecute and to be placed in custody, ADN said.
   It said former secret police chief Erich Mielke, former
economics czar Guenter Mittag and former labor chief Harry Tisch
were under arrest, while the other four remained free. All three
had been members of the ruling Politburo under Honecker. Mielke was
arrested on Thursday.
   Honecker and the seven are charged with corruption and abuse of
office. They had been arrested soon after Honecker's fall but were
later released because of advanced age and poor health.
   Honecker has been staying at a Soviet military hospital outside
East Berlin.
   ADN quoted Federal Prosecutor Guenter Seidel as saying he
intended to continue his investigation against the former East
German leaders, although their poor health often disrupted the
proceedings.



 AP900810-0120 
AP-NR-08-10-90 2233EDT
r i AM-Honecker     08-10 0217
AM-Honecker,0224
Authorities Interrogate Honecker in Murder Probe
EAST BERLIN (AP) 

   East Germany authorities on Friday
interrogated former Communist leader Erich Honecker about his role
in the killings of people who tried to flee the country.
   Honecker and Erich Mielke, head of East Germany's once-feared
secret police agency, were interrogated by federal prosecutors,
said Peter Przybylski, a Justice Ministry spokesman.
   More than 200 people were shot to death or killed by land mines
as they tried to escape from East Germany's Communist rule.
   The government announced in June that Honecker, Mielke and
several border guards would be investigated on possible murder
charges in connection with those deaths.
   Honecker, 77 and in failing health, and several other members of
his ousted regime already have been charged with corruption and
abuse of power.
   The murder charge could put Honecker behind bars for life, but
his poor health makes prosecution questionable. He is staying in a
Soviet hospital outside Berlin.
   Last month, a medical panel ruled that Honecker was too ill to
be jailed pending investigation but fit enough to be prosecuted.
   Mielke was ordered jailed.
   East Germany's democratic government has changed its mind
several times on whether to pursue charges against the aging
members of the former hard-line regime that was toppled in last
autumn's pro-democracy protests.



 AP900825-0099 
AP-NR-08-25-90 1720EST
r i AM-EastGermany-Honecker     08-25 0263
AM-East Germany-Honecker,0270
Report: Honecker Unlikely To Go to Trial in East Germany
WEST BERLIN (AP) 

   Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker will
not stand trial in East Germany as long as the formerly Communist
country exists, a West German newspaper reported.
   The Hamburg-based Bild am Sonntag said Saturday that it would
report in its Sunday editions that Honecker could be prosecuted in
a united Germany, however, for violation of property laws.
   Bild quoted Guenter Seidel, an East German prosecutor, as saying
that Honecker had used $42 million for stocking a private housing
estate for leaders of the former Communist government.
   However, Seidel said that the investigation was not far enough
along to determine whether charges could be filed against Honecker
before East Germany merges with West Germany on Oct. 3.
   Negotiators are still working out the merger of the two German
legal systems.
   Honecker, 78, was ousted as East Germany's leader on Oct. 18,
paving the way for the country's first freely elected government in
March. Honecker is in poor health and remains confined to a Soviet
military hospital in Beelitz outside East Berlin.
   He is under investigation on allegations of abuse of power,
corruption, harboring terrorists and issuing shoot-to-kill orders
to prevent East Germans from escaping to West Germany when he
served as the country's leader.
   Bild said that Erich Mielke, the ex-head of East Germany's
former secret police, was also unlikely to go to court in East
Germany.
   ``I am at the end. I am a dead man,'' Bild quoted Mielke, 82, as
saying at his last interrogation.



 AP900919-0122 
AP-NY-09-19-90 1706EDT
r i AM-Honecker     09-19 0304
AM-Honecker,0349
Report: Ousted Stasi Chief Threatened Honecker in Jail
HAMBURG, West Germany (AP) 

   East Germany's ousted secret police
chief threatened to break former Communist leader Erich Honecker's
neck when the two faced each other in jail, a West German newspaper
reported Wednesday.
   ``You traitor!'' 82-year-old former security chief Erich Mielke
shouted at Honecker, according to Bild newspaper.
   Mielke also screamed at Honecker ``I'll break your neck!'' the
newspaper quoted witnesses as describing the scene when the two met
in an East German jail. Honecker, 78, was jailed for one day in
January.
   Mielke for years headed the dreaded secret police, known as
Stasi, which built up files on 6 million East Germans and kept a
tight rein on the population. He was one of Honecker's closest
aides.
   After the popular revolt last fall that ousted the Communist
regime and opened the way to German unification, Mielke and other
former Communist leaders were jailed.
   Mielke remains in custody. Honecker was released from jail for
health reasons.
   West German authorities on Tuesday opened a criminal
investigation of Mielke. He is suspected of giving sanctuary to
members of West Germany's leftist terrorist group, the Red Army
Faction, and of setting up contacts between the group and
Palestinian guerrillas.
   Honecker is also the target of several criminal investigations,
one in West Germany for obstruction of justice.
   Bild said the imprisoned Mielke also accused other former
Communist officials of betrayal and threatened to retaliate against
them.
   One prison warden told Bild that many of the guards had worked
for Mielke's Stasi and that they might interpret his threat against
Honecker as an order to kill the former Communist chief.
   Bild said Mielke and other members of Honecker's ruling circle
will be moved to a West Berlin prison after German unification on
Oct. 3.
   Honecker also will be moved to the same jail if his health
improves enough for him to be imprisoned. He is suffering from
kidney cancer and is being kept at a Soviet military hospital
oustide East Berlin.



 AP901208-0106 
AP-NY-12-08-90 1735EST
r i AM-Germany-Honecker     12-08 0225
AM-Germany-Honecker,0230
Report: High-Ranking German Demands Soviets Hand Over Honecker
BONN, Germany (AP) 

   A ranking member of Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's party demanded the Soviet Union hand over Erich Honecker,
who is wanted by German authorities on manslaughter charges, a
newspaper reported on Saturday.
   Federal lawmaker Johannes Gerster said refusal to turn over the
deposed East German leader for trial could ``burden'' Bonn and
Moscow's ``outstanding relations,'' the Neue Osnabruecker Zeitung
newspaper reported.
   A Berlin court has issued an arrest warrant for Honecker, 78, on
the manslaughter charges. He is accused of issuing shoot-to-kill
orders to East German guards at the now-fallen Berlin Wall.
   Honecker has denied all charges against him, including that he
was personally responsible for the estimated 200 people who died
trying to escape his repressive government.
   He has taken refuge at a Soviet military hospital in Beelitz,
outside Berlin.
   Soviet officials have said Honecker is staying at the hospital
for humanitarian reasons, and German police need permission from
the Soviets to gain entry.
   ``I demand that the Soviet government immediately release Erich
Honecker and extradite him to German justice officials,'' the
Osnabrueck newspaper quoted Gerster, a member of Kohl's Christian
Democrats, as saying.
   Honecker's fate is one of the first issues facing Bonn and
Moscow since they signed several treaties designed to draw the two
nations closer together.



 FBIS4-42178 
    "drweu104__a94019" 

   FBIS-WEU-94-104-A 
Daily Report 
  29 May 1994 

 ANNEX 
 Germany 
    Erich Honecker Dies in Chile 29 May 
    Erich Honecker Dies in Chile 29 May 
   AU2905165694 Hamburg DPA in German 1602 GMT 29 May 94 -- FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 AU2905165694 
  Hamburg DPA 
  German 

BFN 

  [Text] Berlin -- Erich Honecker, the former GDR head of 
state, died at his house in Santiago, Chile on Sunday morning 
[29 May], according to his lawyer. Lawyer Nicolas Becker, who 
had represented 81-year-old Honecker before the Berlin court in 
1992 and early 1993, told DPA on Sunday afternoon that Honecker 
had rejected an operation. However, everything that was 
sensible had been done with regard to his cancer. 
  Becker could not comment on the exact cause of Honecker's 
death. His colleague, Wolfgang Ziegler, had said earlier that 
the former most powerful man in the GDR had obviously died from 
his liver cancer. 
  Becker said he did not know whether Honecker has left a will 
or where the funeral would be held. This will be decided by the 
family. 
  He also said he cannot say whether Margot Honecker, who had 
informed Becker of her husband's death, will be allowed to stay 
in Chile. After being released from prison in 1993, Honecker 
had traveled to Santiago to join his daughter, who is married to 
a Chilean. Since then, he and his wife had been living in a 
house in a wealthy Santiago area. 




 SJMN91-06353190 
 06353190 
  Photo; PHOTO: Associated Press; A SONG FOR HONECKER -- Supporters of Erich
Honecker sing communist songs Monday night in front of the Chilean Embassy in
Moscow, where he has sought refuge.  
  PAST; EAST; GERMANY; MILITARY; OFFICIAL; USSR; PRESIDENT; SUPPORT; DELAY  
  Mikhail Gorbachev urged all sides Tuesday to take their time in deciding the
fate of Erich Honecker, as the fugitive former East German leader spent a
seventh day of refuge inside the Chilean Embassy.;   A day after the Russian
government backed down from its threat to expel him, diplomats sought to
settle the fate of the 79-year-old Honecker.  
  Front  
  HONECKER FATE STILL UNDECIDED
GORBACHEV URGES A GO-SLOW APPROACH  
     Germany wants to try him for ordering the shooting of people who attempted
to flee to the West during his years in power. But speculation lingers that
German politicians have little real interest in trying a man who may possess
embarrassing secrets.;   "Let's forget about the issue of Erich Honecker for
several days. Let's hope this special issue will be resolved," Gorbachev's
spokesman, Andrei Grachev, quoted the Soviet president as telling German
media.;   But Tass quoted Gorbachev as saying he did not exclude the
possibility that Honecker would leave Russia for North Korea in the next few
days.;   Gorbachev had served as Honecker's protector until the Soviet
leader's political fortunes declined. Last week Russia abruptly ordered
Honecker to leave the country or face expulsion.;   North Korean and Russian
diplomats confirmed that talks were held Tuesday about a North Korean offer
for Honecker to travel to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, for medical
treatment.;   Li Cher Gvan, a consul at the North Korean Embassy, said a
commercial North Korean airliner remained at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport
ready to fly Honecker to Pyongyang. But he said his country was still awaiting
a positive reply from the Russian government on the offer to accept Honecker.
The Russian Foreign Ministry said it had not yet formulated a response.;  
Outside the Chilean Embassy, several dozen demonstrators continued their
vigil, demanding humane treatment for Honecker.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  Moscow  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   911218  
  Wednesday  
  December  
  6A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  318  
  Wednesday, December 18, 1991
00353190,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 AP880310-0062 
AP-NR-03-10-88 0557EST
r a PM-DogLunch     03-10 0239
PM-Dog Lunch,0247
Lunch at Sardi's a Canine Affair
NEW YORK (AP) 

   With no seats and no food for the guests of
honor, everyone agreed that lunch at Sardi's had gone to the dogs.
   Two dogs, to be specific, the city's top police dog and the
nation's top show dog.
   The Dog Fanciers Club organized the event Wednesday to honor
Champion Great Elms Prince Charming II, a fluffy little Pomeranian,
and Nero, a big, amiable bruiser of a German shepherd.
   ``He's a very friendly dog,'' said Nero's master, Officer Joseph
Faraguna. ``In all the arrests I've made with him, he's only bitten
four times.''
   Nero specializes in sniffing out bombs and narcotics. He has
helped the Police Department make hundreds of arrests and has
``apprehended'' more than 50 felons.
   Nero was kept on his long leather leash while Prince emerged
from his elegant, padded carrying case only long enough to pose for
photographers.
   The Pomeranian was named best in show at the prestigious
Westminister Kennel Club Show in Madison Square Garden last month.
   Prince, long used to being coddled and primped, seemed oblivious
to all the attention until Nero grew bold enough to prod him on the
chin. Then he blinked and drew back.
   But neither Nero nor Prince got any lunch from the luncheon at
Sardi's, a prominent midtown Manhattan restaurant.
   Prince, said his agent and master Skip Piazza, ``doesn't have a
very large diet anyway.''



 AP880917-0157 
AP-NR-09-17-88 2111EDT
r i AM-Israel-DogShow     09-17 0309
AM-Israel-Dog Show,0317
Thousands of Israelis Turn Out For Dog Show
By NICOLAS B. TATRO
Associated Press Writer
TEL AVIV, Israel (AP) 

   Taking a break from the headaches of the
Palestinian uprising and Israel's election campaign, thousands of
Israelis turned out Saturday for a canine beauty pageant.
   Marco, a feisty boxer owned by Dov Amir, padded off with the
champion's trophy after beating out 800 other pretty pooches in
Israel's dog-of-the-year contest held in Tel Aviv's Exhibition
Center.
   ``We can find time for other things besides the intefadeh,''
said organizer Avi Marshak, using the Arabic word for uprising to
describe the 9-month-old wave of Palestinian violence aimed at
ending Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
   About 20,000 people attended the two-day show, organizers said.
   Israeli couples in cutoff jeans and short-sleeved shirts pushed
baby strollers from ring to ring to view the more than 50 different
breeds ranging from tiny lap dogs like the Yorkshire terriers to
Great Danes and St. Bernards.
   Marshak said the contest was sanctioned by the World Kennel Club
based in Brussels, Belgium, and had judges from the Netherlands,
South Africa, Italy and Britain.
   But although the competition was billed as an international
event, organizers conceded there were few if any contestants from
abroad. This was in contrast to 1987, before the uprising began,
when a World Dog Show competition attracted scores of foreign
competitors to Israel.
   ``Even so, we don't feel the intefadeh here,'' said Rafi Shahaf,
a veterinarian, who was interviewed in the show ring where Conan,
his steel gray Mastino Napoletano, had just taken a blue ribbon.
   The show briefly pushed the Nov. 1 general elections out of the
limelight for the doglovers. Experts say the razor-tight race
between the right-wing Likud Party and the left-leaning Labor Party
could determine the future of the Israeli-occupied Palestinian
lands.



 LA020489-0060 
 14074 


February 4, 1989, Saturday, Home Edition 




View; Part 5; Page 18; Column 3; View Desk 




209 words 




FAMILY SPOTS: SPORTS ARENA BEING GROOMED FOR DOG SHOW ON SUNDAY 




By ELLEN MELINKOFF 




More than 2,500 dogs, representing 138 breeds, will compete for prizes at 
Sunday's All Breed Dog Show and Obedience Trials at the Los Angeles Sports 
Arena. For families who are thinking about getting a dog, this is a chance to 
size up the possibilities and talk with pet owners about the advantages and 
disadvantages of different breeds. 


Around the arena, owners will be busy grooming and cajoling their charges into 
center-ring readiness. 


Between judgings, a troupe of Dobermans will jump through hoops and barrels and 
will scale walls. In the scent relay, teams of dogs will jump over hurdles and 
locate the jackets of their owners. There will also be a demonstration of how 
dogs herd farm animals. 


Other attractions include the appearance of Warren Eckstein, radio host of "Pet 
Show," who will answer behavioral questions about dogs (as well as cats, pigs 
and goldfish, if he's asked); free veterinary advice; a demonstration of how 
4-H youngsters help train puppies to become guide dogs, and more than 70 
vendors selling dog paraphernalia. A computer is provided for visitors' use to 
find out which breeds would best suit their life styles. 


Show hours are 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. Admission: adults, $4.50; children, $1. 
Information: (818) 789-8350. 




Column 




 SJMN91-06044329 
 06044329 
  Photo; PHOTO: Cap Carpenter -- Extra; Taffe McFadden, foreground, grooms
Rosie, a light miniature poodle, at the McFaddens' Campbell shop; (color)  
  ANIMAL; CONTEST; PET; SERVICE; BUSINESS  
  It's a dog's life for Bill McFadden.;    The 32-year-old professional dog
handler knows that the secret to producing champions is just plain, doggone
hard work. He puts in 18-hour days grooming and conditioning his charges. And,
like a racehorse jockey, he crisscrosses the country showing the dogs for a
variety of owners.  
  Extra 3  
  GROOMING DOGS FOR SUCCESS
COUPLE COMB OUT CHAMP CANINES  
  Also ran in WT12  
     McFadden and his wife, Taffe, run their dog handling business in Campbell
and do it primarily for the enjoyment and satisfaction it brings. Those who
think you can get rich handling dogs are barking up the wrong tree.;    "We
make a good living but the overhead is high and the hours long. Before a show
we sometimes work around the clock brushing and cleaning the dogs, working on
their coats," said McFadden. "And breeds such as poodles have to be highly
trimmed.";    McFadden said he handles an average of 20 to 25 dogs at each
show and works around 120 shows a year all over the U.S. The dogs are frequent
winners in best of breed and best of show categories. "We finish with close to
100 champions a year," he said.;    As a handler, McFadden emphasizes that he
doesn't do obedience training. His job is to trim and condition the dogs and
prepare them physically and mentally. The aim, he said, is to have a
"confident and happy dog" entering a competition.;    Over the last seven
years, McFadden and his wife have shown dogs representing approximately 75
percent of the 135 breeds of dog. Taffe McFadden, a Vancouver, British
Columbia native who has been involved in dog handling since she was a child,
specializes in poodles. The couple also owns two standard poodles and breed
wire fox terriers.;    McFadden's latest product, a Kerry blue terrier named
Kerrageen's Hotspur, won the best of show prize at the 81st Golden Gate Kennel
Club Dog Show held Feb. 2-3 at the Cow Palace in San Francisco. More than
2,000 purebred dogs participated in the national competition.;    It was the
37th best in show win by Kerrageen's Hotspur, making him the top Kerry blue
terrier of all time. The dog is owned by Bryan Percy and Judy Hertwell of
Seattle.;    Kerrageen's Hotspur was scheduled to join McFadden in New York
City last week for the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show at Madison Square
Garden. Recognized as one of the most prestigious shows in all of dogdom,
Westminster is also, with the exception of the Kentucky Derby, the longest
continuous sporting event held in the U.S.  
  MICHAEL CRONK, Mercury News Staff Writer  
  USA  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS  
   910213  
  Wednesday  
  February  
  1  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  442  
  Wednesday February 13, 1991
00044329,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06058250 
 06058250 
  Photo; PHOTO: William Wegman and one of his constant companions curl up.  
  NEW-YORK; ARTS; PROFESSIONAL; ANIMAL; PET  
  ON A recent day, the telephone rang in the home of William Wegman. The
photographer, known for his hilarious portraits of his Weimaraners, picked
up.;    "Hello."  
  Living  
  A DOG'S BEST FRIEND IS WILLIAM WEGMAN  
  Pets  
     Woof.;    In this house, man and dogs speak as one. Their relationship is
unusually tender. One need only listen while Wegman murmurs to Fay Ray and
Battina, her 1 1/2-year-old daughter.;    On Valentine's Day, for example, he
said, "I'll take them out and play with them longer.";    "But I don't want to
be known as a dog zombie," said Wegman, who did go to the Westminster Kennel
Club Dog Show without the dogs. "I go to movies and have friends and play
sports. I swim, play tennis and wind surf.";    Battina begs to differ. "When
Bill leaves, Batty howls," said Andrea Beeman, an assistant to Wegman.;    Man
and dog;    Their home is one floor of a former Orthodox synagogue on the
Lower East Side of Manhattan. During a recent visit, it was possible to see
how the artist gets two even-tempered, relaxed, normal dogs to slip into
florid housedresses or scratch each other's backs. The three simply adore each
other.;    "I'd never heard of Weimaraners," said the artist, who was born 47
years ago in Longmeadow, Mass. His life with Weimaraners began in 1970, the
year he bought a new video camera and Man Ray, a puppy that cost $35.;   
Wegman had never photographed dogs before, but Man Ray was a perfect subject.;
   "He was gray and neutral," the artist said. "I could do him as a dog, a
man, a sculpture, a character, a bat, a frog, an elephant, an Airedale, a
dinosaur, a poodle. I never got tired of him.";    A dog's life;    Had he
been a different breed he would have been a "character actor," Wegman said,
"like Lassie.";    When Man Ray, who had become world famous, died of cancer
in 1981, at the age of 11 years and 8 months, the artist mourned. "I dreamed
that he came back to life," said Wegman, who spent three years living without
a dog. "It was kind of liberating, the years I didn't have a dog.";    In
1984, however, he got another Weimaraner, which was stolen. Yet another dog
died of Parvo, a virus. In 1985, he got Fay Ray, who is now a familiar face
not only among artists but among children who watch "Sesame Street.";    As a
breed, Weimaraners combine "a lap-dog sensibility with a hunting capability,"
the artist said. They curl up on his lap, but since they are pointers, they
can hold a pose.;    They are also good companions for an artist. They are
affectionate. They do not drool. They have style.;    Like world-famous
fashion models, these dogs are lean, supple and fit. In Wegman's home, which
comprises 2,000 square feet with 20-foot-high ceilings, they live a life
unencumbered -- one assumes -- by thoughts of fame or fortune, and seldom
hunger.;    Each morning Wegman feeds them Eukanuba dog food, which he
considers the best around. "It's the highest in protein." he said. He often
adds a spoonful of plain yogurt or cottage cheese. The dogs eat again at 6
p.m.;    The house is designed for both human and canine comfort. There is
nowhere that Wegman goes that the dogs do not. The yard is a run of dirt and
concrete. If their master does not play with them, the dogs just scratch,
sniff, get bored and go to the door to wait for him.  
  ELAINE LOUIE, New York Times  
  USA  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS  
   910227  
  Wednesday  
  February  
  12D  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  594  
  Wednesday February 27, 1991
00058250,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 WSJ890726-0004 
 = 890726 
 890726-0004. 
 It's the Same Way in Any Business:
@  Retiring Early Is Rarely Optional
@  ----
@  By Robert Daniels
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal 
 07/26/89 
 WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) 
 NEW YORK  

   Walk. 
Sit. 
Stay. 
Roll over. 
Go to court. 

   Such is the life of one German short-haired pointer, a show dog bearing the name CH. Robin Crest Lorien Corniche. 

   Cory, as he is called for short, isn't any run-of-the-litter critter. 
The "CH." in his name stands for champion. 
He has won 245 show awards as Best of Breed and 19 awards as Best in Show. 

   Basically, his problem comes from serving more than one master. 
One of the dog's three owners thinks the kennel-club world has seen enough of Cory, who is four years old. 
The other two owners think he has plenty of prizes still ahead. 

   In what is fast becoming a pit-bull match, the one owner, Anthony Attalla, is suing the other two, John and Rita Remondi, charging that they have been showing Cory even though he is officially retired (as announced in Dog News). 

   In the suit, filed in federal district court in Manhattan, Mr. Attalla says, "Cory has achieved the pinnacle of success . . . and any further competition would only diminish what he has accomplished." 

   Mr. Attalla claims that his work with Cory is no gravy train. 
In the suit, he says that under the owners' agreement he lays out fees and other expenses for showing the animal and he decides when to show -- or to retire -- Cory. 
So far, Mr. Attalla says, he's spent over $125,000, the amount sought in damages. 
In return, he is entitled to all ribbons and awards. 
The Remondis are in charge of caring for the dog. 

   Despite the retirement, the suit says, the Remondis showed Cory twice recently. (He placed fourth and then didn't place at all.) For now, a judge's order temporarily bars them from further shows. 

   In a memo filed in court, Mr. Remondi claims that Mr. Attalla retired the dog "simply and solely to better" the chances that Mr. Attalla's agent would win with a rival Rover. 
The Remondis also say Mr. Attalla has bought a Rottweiler to show in another category and doesn't want to spend money on both Cory and the other dog. 
They claim that Mr. Attalla has breached the pact by not paying certain expenses. 
Stud fees are also at issue. 

   The Remondis argue that the retirement "fraudulently" deprives them of their opportunity to show Cory, a dog who they assert "is in the best condition of his life." 




 AP880622-0184 
AP-NR-06-22-88 2103EST
r a AM-People-Bernstein     06-22 0211
AM-People-Bernstein,0216
Stars Will Perform at Birthday Bash Honoring Leonard Bernstein
LENOX, Mass. (AP) 

   Beverly Sills, Lauren Bacall, Betty Comden
and Phyllis Newman are among performers who will sing, act and make
guest appearances at a birthday bash in August for conductor
Leonard Bernstein.
   The Leonard Bernstein Gala Birthday Performance is a benefit
concert scheduled for the composer's 70th birthday, Aug. 25, to
raise money for the Tanglewood Music Center, where Bernstein got
his conducting start.
   Sills will be host. Performances will include the Boston
Symphony Orchestra, the Boston Pops Orchestra and the Tanglewood
Festival Chorus under the direction of some of the many conductors
whose careers have been guided by Bernstein.
   Bacall and soprano Barbara Hendricks will perform a movement
from Bernstein's Symphony No. 3, ``Kaddish.'' Violin soloist Midori
will play two movements from his ``Serenade.''
   The concert will celebrate Bernstein's accomplishments in
popular music with excerpts from ``West Side Story,'' ``On the
Town'' and others. Dame Gwyneth Jones and Frederica von Stade will
be among those performing highlights from ``Fidelio,'' ``Tristan
und Isolde'' and other works to honor Bernstein's landmark opera
recordings.
   Tickets start at $20 for a spot on the lawn and run up to $5,000
for benefactors, who get a seat in the open-air auditorium.



 AP880720-0262 
AP-NR-07-20-88 1027EDT
a e PM-APArts:Tanglewood Adv26   07-20 0703
PM-AP Arts: Tanglewood, Adv 26,0723
$Adv 26
For Release Tues PMs, July 26 and Thereafter
By CAROLYN LUMSDEN
Associated Press Writer
LENOX, Mass. (AP) 

   Actresses Lauren Bacall, Betty Comden and
Phyllis Newman are among performers in the birthday bash being
thrown in August for conductor Leonard Bernstein at the music
center where he got his start.
   The Tanglewood Music Center also is celebrating the 50th
anniversary of its Music Shed this summer with a special concert by
the resident Boston Symphony Orchestra featuring the same music,
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, that inaugurated the building in 1938.
   The Bernstein weekend alone, with tickets as high as $5,000
each, may bring in more than $1 million for the festival's
endowment fund, according to Caroline Smedvig of the symphony.
   ``Because Tanglewood is so special for him and, conversely, he's
so special to us, the combination will produce what we hope will be
a unique event,'' she said.
   The Leonard Bernstein Gala Birthday Performance is a four-day
affair beginning on the composer's 70th birthday, Aug. 25, to raise
money for the music center.
   Beverly Sills, who announced last month that she will step down
as general director of the New York City Opera, will be the host of
the event. Bacall and soprano Barbara Hendricks will perform a
movement from Bernstein's Symphony No. 3, ``Kaddish.'' Violin
soloist Midori will play two movements from his ``Serenade.''
   Dame Gwyneth Jones and Frederica von Stade will be among those
performing highlights from ``Fidelio'' and other works to honor
Bernstein's landmark opera recordings.
   The concert will also celebrate Bernstein's accomplishments in
popular music with excerpts from such works as ``West Side Story''
and ``On the Town.''
   The orchestra opened the nine-week season with the special July
1 concert marking the first half-century of the Music Shed.
   The season of classical music will be expanded with performances
by such popular rock, jazz and folk artists as The Beach Boys,
George Benson and Leo Kottke.
   But the highlight of the new season is the celebration of
Bernstein's birthday.
   The BSO is even billing the birthday party as ``one of the music
world's great occasions'' and is negotiating the television rights
in the United States and Europe.
   Among the conductor's friends who have been invited to the bash
are pop star Michael Jackson and British Princess Diana, although
Tanglewood officials say the have not yet received an answer from
the celebrities.
   Bernstein was a member of the original Tanglewood Music Center
class of 1940, where he became a protege of Tanglewood founder
Serge Koussevitzky.
   When Koussevitzky retired in 1949, he tried to have the young
Bernstein named as his successor, but the BSO's trustees chose
Charles Munch because they considered Bernstein too young and
tainted by popular music.
   He later wrote the score for the musical ``West Side Story'' and
returned every summer to conduct and teach.
   Conductors Seiji Ozawa, John Williams, John Mauceri and Michael
Tillson Thomas will share the poduim featuring some of his works on
the night of his birth.
   The following night, Ozawa and special guests will appear in a
Music Shed concert for a performance intended to show Bernstein's
influence on other musicians.
   Aug. 27 will be given over to a performance of Bernstein's
``Mass'' by a 250-member troupe from the Indiana University school
of music.
   The four-day celebration concludes with Bernstein conducting the
annual Serge and Ola Koussevitzky Memorial Concert, including a
performance of Tchaikovsky's Symphony No. 5, on Aug. 28.
   All proceeds go to the music center's endowment fund, and to a
fund Bernstein established for aspiring young conductors. Ticket
prices start at $20 for a space on the lawn and go up to $5,000 for
front row seats for benefactors.
   Other highlights of the new season include several major debuts,
including that of Soviet painist Vladimir Feltsman, who arrived in
the United States last August after an an eight-year battle to
emigrate; a return visit by the Israel Philharmonic; and a recital
by Irish flutist James Galway.
   This summer is the second in a four-year jubilee of the
festival's 50th anniversary. Events climax in 1990 with observances
marking the 50th year of the music center, the festival's school.

End Adv PM Tues July 26


 AP881115-0011 
AP-NR-11-15-88 0129EST
r a BC-Bernstein     11-15 0424
BC-Bernstein,0445
Bernstein Celebrates 45th Conducting Anniversary
Eds: No PMs planned
By MARY CAMPBELL
Associated Press Writer
NEW YORK (AP) 

   Leonard Bernstein, whose 70th birthday in August
was marked with a gala at Tanglewood, returned to Carnegie Hall with
the New York Philharmonic 45 years after he made his triumphant
conducting debut there with the orchestra.
   And of course, Monday night's program consisted of three
Bernstein compositions that were played shimmeringly well. As well
it should: It was the 1,215th time Bernstein conducted the orchestra.
   On Nov. 14, 1943, Bernstein, the Philharmonic's then-assistant
conductor, filled for an ailing Bruno Walter on such short notice
there was no rehearsal. The concert was broadcast nationally on
radio. And there was such acclaim that Bernstein, who had never led
the orchestra in concert until that day, was catapulted to fame, at
age 25.
   At intermission, Mrs. Artur Rodzinski, whose late husband was the
Philharmonic music's director in 1943 and hired Bernstein as his
assistant, was introduced from a box.
   Violinist Jacques Margolies, who played in the Philharmonic that
Sunday, is still a member and was playing on Monday night. Eight
others who also were members in 1943 _ violinist Louis Fishzohn,
oboist Albert Goltzer, timpanist Saul Goodman, bassist Homer Mensch,
cellist Martin Ormandy, assistant concertmaster Michael Rosenker,
and trumpeters James Smith and William Vacchiano _ went on stage.
   Bernstein gave bear hugs to all nine.
   ``I feel older than all of them,'' said Bernstein.
   Bernstein was given a silver box engraved with a reproduction of
Monday evening's program cover _ a caricature of him, with jutting
chin, bright eye, flowing hair and baton, and reading ``with love
and thanks of the Philharmonic family to Lennie.''
   ``Will this birthday never end?,'' he told the audience.
   Monday's concert began with Bernstein's ``Chichester Psalms,''
with the splendid Westminster Symphonic Choir. Todd Caruso, a member
of the American Boychoir whose voice is high, pure and moving, sang
the solo part.
   Violinist Gidon Kremer, a native of the Latvian town of Riga in
the Soviet Union, was soloist in ``Serenade for Violin, String
Orchestra, Harp and Percussion.'' Kremer's sound isn't warm but his
technique is breathtaking.
   Pianist Krystian Zimerman, who was born in Zabrze, Poland, often
performs with Bernstein in Europe. He was the respectful and
thoroughly engaged soloist in the final work on the program,
Bernstein's ``Symphony No. 2 for Piano and Orchestra,'' subtitled
``The Age of Anxiety'' after W.H. Auden's poem.
   All the performers donated their services, with proceeds
benefiting the Philharmonic's efforts on behalf of American
conductors.



 AP900716-0007 
AP-NR-07-16-90 0027EDT
r i PM-LeonardBernstein     07-16 0328
PM-Leonard Bernstein,0336
71-Year-Old Conductor Cancels Performances, Cites Exhaustion
TOKYO (AP) 

   Conductor Leonard Bernstein has canceled several
performances in Japan due to exhaustion and lingering illness and
will return to the United States to recover, his manager announced
today.
   ``Leonard Bernstein is suffering from exhaustion as a result of
trying to fulfill his professional obligations while not having
fully recovered from several ailments he suffered this spring.
Complete rest for an extended period is required if this remarkable
man is to regain his usual high energy level,'' said Dr. Kevin
Cahill, the conductor's personal physician.
   Bernstein, 71, has suffered from severe influenza, pleurisy, and
pneumonia since the beginning of the year, Cahill said in a
statement released by Harry Kraut, Bernstein's manager.
   Dr. Angelo Aquista, an associate of Cahill, flew to Japan to
accompany the conductor back to New York, it said. Kraut did not
provide the time or date of Bernstein's departure.
   Bernstein had been scheduled to conduct the London Symphony
Orchestra in four performances in Japan, ending with a concert on
July 22.
   Bernstein issued a separate statement apologizing to his fans
and sponsors and saying that he had asked LSO principal conductor
Michael Tilson Thomas and Japanese conductor Eiji Oue to fulfill
his conducting responsibilities.
   On Saturday and Sunday, Bernstein canceled appearances with an
orchestra of young musicians from the Pacific-Asia region who had
been training under principals of the LSO during the three-week
Pacific Music Festival in northern Japan.
   Bernstein inaugurated the festival last month. He started the
event along the lines of the Tanglewood music festival in
Massachusetts, where young musicians train with the Boston Symphony
Orchestra.
   The Japan festival is believed to be the first festival in Asia
where young musicians can train with a professional orchestra.
   Kraut's statement said it was not known whether Bernstein would
be able to conduct next month at the Tanglewood festival or during
the Tanglewood Music Center Orchestra Tour in Europe later this
summer.



 AP901010-0030 
AP-NY-10-10-90 0251EDT
r a PM-LeonardBernstein     10-10 0451
PM-Leonard Bernstein,0519
Leonard Bernstein Giving Up Conducting
NEW YORK (AP) 

   Conductor Leonard Bernstein, the ``West Side
Story'' composer who mesmerized audiences with his passion and
physical flair at the podium, is giving up the baton because of
poor health.
   The 72-year-old maestro suffers from a lung tumor, emphysema and
pulmonary infections and has been told by his doctor to stop
conducting and performing on the piano, his spokeswoman said
Tuesday.
   ``Leonard Bernstein will henceforth devote his professional
energies to composing, writing and education,'' said Margaret
Carson.
   He last conducted Aug. 19 at the Tanglewood Music Center in
western Massachusetts.
   Bernstein's announcement was met with dismay in the music world,
especially at the New York Philharmonic, which he directed from
1958 to 1969. ``I receive this unfortunate news in utter shock,''
said Zubin Mehta, music director.
   Albert K. Webster, managing director of the Philharmonic, said:
``Leonard Bernstein has BEEN the New York Philharmonic for more
than 45 years. We all will be less for the loss of his magic
baton.''
   Bernstein still hopes to participate in an AIDS benefit at
Carnegie Hall on Oct. 28 but canceled all appearances with
orchestras in New York, Israel, Vienna and London and with festival
orchestras at Tanglewood, Germany and Japan.
   Bernstein, known for his vigorous style at the podium, once led
an orchestra performance at a liberated concentration camp. Last
Christmas, he celebrated the tumbling of the Berlin Wall by
conducting Beethoven's ``Ninth Symphony.''
   In May, he canceled plans to conduct opening night of the
Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., citing ``a near brush with
pneumonia.''
   Carson said Bernstein has had increased difficulty breathing in
past weeks. Dr. Kevin M. Cahill attributed the problem to emphysema
complicated by a tumor and pulmonary infections. Bernstein was once
a heavy smoker.
   Bernstein is not hospitalized. Carson said the conductor was
told that rest offers the best hope for returning to limited
activities.
   She said Bernstein plans to continue work on a new chamber music
piece to be performed next spring, a new musical theater work he
hopes to finish by summer and several educational, film and
recording projects, as well as his memoirs.
   Bernstein was the wunderkind of American music at a time when
all respected conductors in the United States were born and trained
in Europe.
   His first published composition was ``The Clarinet Sonata'' in
1942. He conducted his first symphony, the ``Jeremiah,'' with the
Pittsburgh Symphony in 1944. That year his ballet, ``Fancy Free,''
choreographed by Jerome Robbins, opened and became the basis for
the Broadway musical ``On the Town.''
   After Boston Symphony Orchestra conductor Serge Koussevitzky
died in 1951, Bernstein became head of the orchestra and conducting
departments at Tanglewood. His first opera, ``Trouble in Tahiti,''
was performed in 1952. He composed ``Candide'' in 1956 and ``West
Side Story'' in 1957.
   In 1969, he retired from the post to concentrate on composing
and was appointed the Philharmonic's laureate conductor for life.
He has conducted 1,244 New York Philharmonic concerts, more than
any other conductor.



 AP901016-0097 
AP-NY-10-16-90 1510EDT
u a PM-BernsteinMemorial 1stLd-Writethru a0483 10-16 0286
PM-Bernstein Memorial, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0483,0313
Leonard Bernstei Buried In Brooklyn
Eds: LEADS with two grafs to UPDATE with Bernstein buried today.
Picks up in 3rd graf, `Flags at ...'
By JUDIE GLAVE
Associated Press Writer
NEW YORK (AP) 

   Leonard Bernstein, whose wide-ranging talents
and flamboyant personality helped make him the first American
maestro to conquer music's international podium, was buried today
alongside his wife.
   Bernstein, who died of lung failure Sunday at age 72, was buried
this afternoon in private ceremonies at Greenwood Cemetery in
Brooklyn. His wife, Felicia Montealegre, died in 1978.
   Flags at Lincoln Center, where the New York Philharmonic
performs, were lowered in memory of the orchestra's first
American-born music director. Bernstein was appointed in 1958 and
stepped down in 1969 to spend more time composing.
   The Philharmonic will perform an all-Bernstein program beginning
Thursday and continuing through Oct. 23. The schedule had called
for works by Shostakovich and Beethoven.
   A memorial concert also is planned for Carnegie Hall on Nov. 14,
the 47th anniversary of Bernstein's Philharmonic debut.
   Famed for his gymnastics at the podium, Bernstein composed
symphonies as well as movie scores and Broadway shows such as
``West Side Story,'' ``On the Town'' and ``Candide.''
   His Emmy-winning ``Young People's Concerts'' on television
introduced thousands to classical music.
   ``He was the most unique musician of this century, there is no
doubt about it,'' said Zubin Mehta, music director of the New York
Philharmonic and the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra.
   Larry Kert, who played Tony in the Broadway production of ``West
Side Story,'' said Bernstein himself played the piano for him
during rehearsals.
   ``He could have gotten a rehearsal pianist, but he cared too
much,'' Kert said. ``I was the new kid on the block and he stroked
me and took care of me - and I will never forget him for that.''



 AP901019-0072 
AP-NY-10-19-90 0855EDT
r e BC-Bernstein-Philharmoni 2ndLd-Writethru   10-19 0521
BC-Bernstein-Philharmonic, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0475,0606
Bernstein's Philharmonic Lets His Music Speak for Them
Eds: Fixes typo in Philharmonic in 1st graf
By MARTIN STEINBERG
Associated Press Writer
NEW YORK (AP) 

   For the New York Philharmonic, it was supposed
to be a night of Beethoven and Shostakovich. The fates made it a
night of Leonard Bernstein.
   The official catalog of his works says Bernstein led 74
orchestras. But this was HIS orchestra, and the musicians came to
pay tribute to THEIR laureate conductor, who led them through 1,244
concerts during his 47-year association with the Philharmonic.
   They let his music do the talking.
   ``Tonight's concert is not an evening in which we want to dwell
on the passing of a giant, but rather what he has left us,'' guest
conductor Leonard Slatkin told the audience at Avery Fisher Hall on
Thursday night.
   So four nights after Bernstein's death at age 72, Beethoven's
``Violin Concerto'' became Bernstein's ``Serenade for Solo Violin,
String Orchestra, Harp and Percussion'' (1954); Shostakovich's
``Symphony No. 4'' became Bernstein's ``Symphony No. 1
(Jeremiah),'' written in 1942.
   Also added were his ``Chichester Psalms'' (1965) and his
overture to ``Candide'' (1956). The substitute Bernstein program
was being repeated Friday night, Saturday and Tuesday.
   It was an extraordinary concert.
   There weren't many smiling faces among the audience or
musicians. Slatkin's brief introductory comments, followed by the
whimsical ``Candide,'' broke some of the tension.
   Then came the eclectic ``Serenade,'' which Bernstein's program
notes says is supposed to be based on Plato's ``Symposium.'' It
begins with a lyrical praise of the Eros, the god of love. The
piece is sometimes jocular, sometimes melancholy, sometimes
assaulting and sometimes hedonistic. It ends in drunken revelry, an
intrusion of jazz - as if Bernstein was looking down from heaven
and telling the audience, ``It's O.K. to smile tonight.''
   The soloist - concertmaster Glenn Dicterow - played with much
agility, especially through the difficult double stops and
especially considering the lack of preparation time.
   The mourning returned after intermission, but not without
optimism.
   ``Jeremiah'' begins with suspenseful strings, followed by a
cantorial French horn, a melodic return to the strings and then a
prophetic blaring of brass. The second movement continues the
point-counterpoint of brass versus strings (Jeremiah versus the
corrupt priests, with Nebuchadnezzar looming on the horizon). In
the third movement, Jerusalem has fallen to the Babylonian king.
Judea is exiled. Jeremiah weeps.
   ``How she sits desolate -
   ``The city once so full of people -
   ``She is become as a widow.''
   During her chanting of the prophet's ``Lamentations,''
mezzo-soprano Wendy White had to wipe a tear from her eye. S did
members of the audience.
   Last on the program was another Hebraic elegy, ``Chichester
Psalms.'' The New York Choral Artists and a boy soloist joined the
orchestra.
   Two harpists dominated the center of the crowded stage.
   ``Awake, psaltery and harp!'' the choir begins in Hebrew.
   ``I will rouse the dawn.''
   In the second movement an angelic 8th-grader, Evan Weber, sings
King David's 23rd Psalm, ``The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not
want.''
   After he finishes, the men's chorus bellows: ``Why do the
nations rage?''
   The piece, however, ends in a Mahlerian motif and chorus
declaring a message Bernstein had sought for society:
   ``Behold how good,
   ``And how pleasant it is,
   ``For brethren to dwell
   ``Together in unity.''
   To emphasize the point after the final note, Slatkin suspended
his hands for several long moments of silence. Then came the
cascade of applause. For Leonard Bernstein.



 AP901114-0087 
AP-NY-11-14-90 1514EST
r e AM-BernsteinConcert     1-14 0305
AM-Bernstein Concert,0327
Bernstein Remembered at Concert on His Magical Day
By MARY CAMPBELL
Associated Press Writer
NEW YORK (AP) 

   On the stage where Leonard Bernstein made his
sensational New York Philharmonic conducting debut 47 years ago,
the orchestra remembered the maestro at a concert that included
selections from his ``Mass'' and ``Chichester Psalms.''
   Wednesday's midday concert at Carnegie Hall also came on the
90th birthday of the late composer-conductor's close friend, Aaron
Copland. And it was the 36th anniversary of the first TV broadcast
by Bernstein, who died Oct. 16.
   Speakers, introducing various selections and often quoting from
Bernstein's writings, included Bernstein's three children,
son-in-law and friends Lauren Bacall and Schuyler Chapin.
   Bernstein's daughter Jamie Thomas said her father had loved
numerical coincidences ``and today there's a flock of them.''
   The concert began with selections from Bernstein's ``Mass,''
which he composed for the opening of the Kennedy Center for
Performing Arts in Washington, and ended with Psalm 133, in Hebrew,
from Bernstein's ``Chichester Psalms.''
   Conductors were Michael Tilson Thomas, Michael Barrett,
Christoph Eschenbach and James Levine. The orchestra played the
overture to Bernstein's ``Candide'' with a symbolically empty
podium, which brought tears to some of the invited audience and a
standing ovation.
   Cellist Mstislav Rostropovich played a Bach sarabande. Singers
were the Westminster Choir, mezzo-sopranos Marilyn Horne and
Christa Ludwig, soprano Clamma Dale, tenor Jerry Hadley and
baritones Thomas Hampson and Chester Ludgin.
   First chair musicians from the Boston Symphony, Israel
Philharmonic, London Symphony, Santa Cecilia Orchestra and Vienna
Philharmonic flew here, at their orchestras' expense, to take part.
   Two pieces by Copland were played. The concert also included
Schumann, Haydn and Mahler as well as excerpts from six Bernstein
works.
   Bernstein was the New York Philharmonic's 25-year-old assistant
conductor on Nov. 14, 1943, when he filled in at the last minute
for an ailing Bruno Walter.



 LA101590-0066 
 292731 


October 15, 1990, Monday, Home Edition 



LEONARD BERNSTEIN 



Part A; Page 1; Column 3; Metro Desk 




2706 words 




LEONARD BERNSTEIN DIES; CONDUCTOR, COMPOSER; 


MUSIC: RENAISSANCE MAN OF HIS ART WAS 72. THE LONGTIME LEADER OF THE N.Y. 
PHILHARMONIC CARVED A NICHE IN HISTORY WITH 'WEST SIDE STORY.' 




By MYRNA OLIVER, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




Leonard Bernstein, the Renaissance man of music who excelled as pianist, 
composer, conductor and teacher and was, as well, the flamboyant ringmaster of 
his own nonstop circus, died Sunday in his Manhattan apartment. He was 72. 


Bernstein, known and beloved by the world as "Lenny," died at 6:15 p.m. in the 
presence of his son, Alexander, and physician, Kevin M. Cahill, who said the 
cause of death was complications of progressive lung failure. On Cahill's 
advice, the conductor had announced Tuesday that he would retire. Cahill said 
progressive emphysema complicated by a pleural tumor and a series of lung 
infections had left Bernstein too weak to continue working. 


In recent months, Bernstein canceled performances with increasing frequency. 
His last conducting appearance was at Tanglewood, Mass., on Aug. 19. 


Bernstein was the first American-born conductor to lead a major symphony 
orchestra, often joining his New York Philharmonic in playing his own pieces, 
while conducting from the piano. 


He etched other niches in history by composing the indelible "West Side Story" 
and teaching a generation about classical music via the innovative television 
series "Omnibus." 


Exhibiting remarkable talent and expertise in four areas that most artists wish 
they possessed in merely one, Bernstein still might have remained an obscure 
musician without the unique theatrical flair that dominated his personal as 
well as professional life. With it, he became a personality, well known even to 
people who never bought a ticket to a musical performance or watched a serious 
television show. 


The dervish persona, including his upstart gymnastics on the podium, never 
lessened throughout his long life in the spotlight. 


He made classical music understandable and palatable to the masses. And he 
lifted popular music to a higher plane, infusing performers and listeners with 
his manic joy in creating tonal sound. 


"Some conductors mellow with age," commented Times music critic Martin 
Bernheimer when Bernstein conducted the Los Angeles Philharmonic at UCLA in 
1986. "(But) Bernstein, at 68, remains a frenetic combination of orbiting 
rocket, aerobics master, super-juggler, matinee idol, booming cannon, 
hysterical mime, heart-rending tragedian, bouncing ball, sky writer, riveting 
machine, mawkish sentimentalist and danseur ignoble." 


Describing the conductor in the same concert, Bernheimer referred to him as 
"the shrugging, jumping, sighing, soaring, gushing, crouching, rocking, 
rolling, bounding, bobbing, leaping, jiggling, stabbing, hunching, bumping, 
grinding and grunting maestro in excelsis." 


Critics also were quick to agree that had his envied and often-criticized 
showmanship masked lazy, sloppy or inept musicianship, Bernstein could never 
have remained an internationally sought-after conductor for five decades. He 
knew what he was doing, and the musicians he accompanied, wrote for, conducted, 
or lectured to and taught admired him as one of their own. 


Louis Bernstein (so-named because his maternal grandmother insisted) was born 
Aug. 25, 1918, in Lawrence, Mass., to two Russian Jewish immigrants. His 
father, Samuel Joseph Bernstein, was an entrepreneur of women's hair care 
products and a Talmudic scholar. His mother, Jennie Resnick Bernstein, who 
survives him, said her son always had an ear for music. "When he was 4 or 5, he 
would play an imaginary piano on his windowsill." 


The parents preferred the name "Leonard" and called the boy that. When his 
kindergarten teacher asked "Louis Bernstein" to stand up, he remained seated 
and looked around the room to see who shared his last name. Bernstein changed 
his name legally at age 16, when he got his first driver's license. 


His mega musical talent emerged belatedly and almost by accident. 


When Bernstein was 10, a divorcing aunt stored her old upright piano with his 
parents, and the boy who used to play at the windowsill became fascinated with 
it. He asked for lessons, and soon was playing better than his teacher, a 
neighbor's daughter who charged $1 a lesson. 


By age 12, he was studying at the New England Conservatory of Music and had 
determined, despite his father's objections, that music -- at that point 
playing the piano -- would be his career. 


Bernstein's stunning instinctive talents for sight-reading, remembering 
complicated scores, and improvisation became evident as he played, and altered, 
classical, jazz and popular music. He produced his own shows and versions of 
"The Mikado" and "Carmen," and performed as piano soloist with his school 
orchestra and the State Symphony Orchestra. 


He reveled in music while excelling in athletics and the classical subjects 
taught at the 300-year-old Boston Latin School. 


At Harvard University, Bernstein studied piano and composition, but developed a 
serious interest in composing only after meeting American composer Aaron 
Copland. 


A fan and practitioner of his music, Bernstein met Copland in a typical 
it-could-only-happen-to-Lenny incident. Invited to a dance recital in New York, 
Bernstein sat in the balcony next to a man he did not recognize. Invited 
afterward to a post-recital birthday party for Copland, Bernstein commandeered 
the piano and played Copland's "Piano Variations." His performance captivated 
the man he had met in the balcony, who of course was Copland. 


They became lifelong friends. Copland introduced Bernstein to several composers 
and got him his first job -- transcribing music for the publisher Boosey and 
Hawkes. Ironically, Copland subsequently urged the torn Bernstein to make 
conducting, rather than composing or even piano playing, his career. 


Conducting emerged as a possibility to Bernstein that same year -- 1937, his 
sophomore year at Harvard -- when he met the Greek conductor Dimitri 
Mitropoulos during the maestro's visit to campus. Mitropoulos was so impressed 
with Bernstein's playing that he invited him to attend rehearsals with the 
Boston Symphony. The maestro also talked with Bernstein privately in his 
dressing room after concerts, promising to keep in touch. 


"The influence of Mitropoulos on my life, on my conducting life is enormous and 
usually greatly underrated or not known at all," Bernstein wrote years later, 
after his mentors had all died, "because ordinarily the two great conductors 
with whom I studied are the ones who receive the credit for whatever conducting 
prowess I have, namely Serge Koussevitzky and Fritz Reiner. . . . But long 
before I met either of them, I had met Dimitri Mitropoulos . . . and watching 
him conduct those two weeks of rehearsals and concerts with the Boston Symphony 
laid some kind of conductorial passion and groundwork in my psyche which I 
wasn't even aware of until many years later." 


Graduated from Harvard and out of work after a summer in New York, Bernstein 
asked Mitropoulos what he should do. 


"You must be a conductor," Mitropoulos replied, urging him to study at 
Juilliard or with Reiner at Curtis Institute in Philadelphia. It was fall and 
conducting classes at Juilliard were full, so Bernstein went to Philadelphia 
for two years. 


During the summers he studied under Koussevitzky, conductor of the Boston 
Symphony, at the new school Koussevitzky was starting at the orchestra's summer 
home, Tanglewood. 


"He became like a surrogate father to me," Bernstein later said of 
Koussevitzky, his third major conducting mentor. "He had no children of his own 
and I had a father whom I loved very much but who was not for this musical 
thing at all. . . . And so I found another father: first Mitropoulos, then 
Reiner, and now Koussevitzky. But the Koussevitzky relationship was very 
special, very warm." 


Bernstein later became Koussevitzky's assistant and returned to Tanglewood 
annually to conduct and teach. He so revered the maestro that he was married in 
Koussevitzky's shoes and white suit and always conducted wearing his cuff 
links. 


It was Koussevitzky -- and fate -- who arranged Bernstein's meteoric ascension 
to world-class conductor at the unheard-of age of 25. 


On his 25th birthday, Aug. 25, 1943, Bernstein was told by the Koussevitzkys 
that he should visit Artur Rodzinsky, newly appointed music director of the New 
York Philharmonic, at his Stockbridge, Conn., farm. 


"I am going to need an assistant conductor," Rodzinsky told him. "I have gone 
through all the conductors I know of in my mind and I finally asked God whom I 
shall take and God said, 'Take Bernstein,' " he said, granting the position as 
a favor not to God but to Koussevitzky. 


Remarkable as his appointment was considering that he was an American and so 
young, Bernstein was given little chance of actually taking the podium. In the 
orchestra's history, no assistant conductor had ever been called on. 


But for "Lucky Lenny" history made an exception. 


On Nov. 14, less than three months after Bernstein got the job, guest conductor 
Bruno Walter fell ill and Rodzinsky was snowed in at his farm. 


Jennie Tourel had sung Bernstein's "I Hate Music" at her Town Hall debut the 
previous night, in itself an event big enough to bring his parents to town, and 
he had played for her and the post-recital party. 


With no rehearsal, a hangover and three hours sleep, Bernstein was to conduct a 
complex program broadcast nationwide on CBS radio. 


The New York Times chronicled the epic event on Page One and stated in an 
editorial: "Mr. Bernstein had to have something approaching genius to make full 
use of his opportunity. . . . It's a good American success story. The warm, 
friendly triumph of it filled Carnegie Hall and spread over the airwaves." 


Bernstein was not to get his own orchestra until he took over the New York 
Philharmonic in 1957-58. He had no time for one. He was too much in demand 
around the world as the wunderkind guest conductor. 


Successful as a pianist, composer and conductor, Bernstein, according to Joan 
Peyser in a controversial biography, consulted psychiatrists because of his 
internal conflict over the three pursuits. 


"It is impossible for me to make an exclusive choice among the various 
activities," Bernstein wrote in 1946. "What seems right for me at any given 
moment is what I must do. . . . The ends are music itself . . . and the means 
are my private problem." 


The piano became an occasional solo onstage or a celebrated party pastime. 
Bernstein concentrated seriously on composing while developing and 
commercializing his conducting career. 


His first major composition, a symphony titled "Jeremiah," was introduced in 
1942, and his first ballet, "Fancy Free," and related first musical, "On the 
Town," both debuted in 1944. 


He sought to be a classical composer, winning plaudits for symphonies 
("Jeremiah" was followed by "The Age of Anxiety" in 1949 and "Kaddish" in 
1963), sonatas, and the operas "Trouble in Tahiti" in 1953 and "A Quiet Place" 
in 1983. 


In writing music, Bernstein achieved greater success on Broadway, and even in 
Hollywood, than in Lincoln Center. He followed "On the Town" with the musicals 
"Wonderful Town" in 1953, the score for the film "On the Waterfront" in 1954, 
and the critically acclaimed but less popular "Candide" in 1956. His best and 
best-remembered work, "West Side Story," debuted in 1957. 


"If I can write one real, moving American opera that any American can 
understand (and one that is, notwithstanding, a serious musical work), I shall 
be a happy man," Bernstein said in 1948. 


When many suggested a decade later that he had achieved his dream with "West 
Side Story," he disagreed, saying: "There are moments when I think so, but as a 
sum total it fails to be an opera. Because at the denouement, at the dramatic 
unraveling, the music stops. 


"But I don't love it any less," he added, reveling in the adulation his 
adaptation of the Romeo and Juliet conflict had produced. "It doesn't make it a 
stepchild or a foundling." 


In teaching, his fourth area of expertise, Bernstein taught regularly at 
Tanglewood and won his place in academic annals with his Charles Eliot Norton 
Lectures on tonality at Harvard in 1973. 


It was on television in the 1950s and 1960s, with his "Young People's Concerts" 
of the Philharmonic and "Omnibus," that Bernstein taught the nation. 


"An assessment of Bernstein must include his talent and contribution as a 
teacher and popularizer of music, a role that has set him apart most from other 
performers," conductor, historian and Bard College President Leon Botstein 
wrote in Harper's in 1983. 


Instinctively adept at television, Bernstein became a prototype for Carl Sagan, 
Alistair Cooke and others now familiar on instructive programs on the Public 
Broadcasting System. 


Bernstein's programs, Botstein said, "displayed his gift for analyzing and 
enthusing about classical music without sacrificing the integrity of the score, 
its complexity, or its simple genius. No one before or since Bernstein has been 
so effective -- artistically and commercially -- in proselytizing and bringing 
alive serious music to a mass audience." 


The television classics won Bernstein a coveted Peabody award. 


Bernstein was able to apply his innate ability for commercializing his art that 
had made him wealthy to the struggling New York Philharmonic. He introduced 
free concerts in the park and put the orchestra on television, widening its 
audience and tripling paid concert attendance. 


He left the orchestra in 1969, after a record 11-year tenure at the helm, to 
have more time for composing and guest conducting. 


If two rings of the Bernstein circus rested in popular and classical music, the 
third was anchored in his uproarious personal life. Known for his emotional 
embraces of both sexes, Bernstein loved crowds and kept friends and family with 
him throughout the night at his Manhattan apartment or Connecticut country 
home. 


A heavy smoker and drinker who partied or worked until dawn and slept until 
noon, he claimed he composed or studied scores even when surrounded by people. 


"God knows, I should be dead by now," he said as he approached 70, 
characteristically cavalier about his health. "I smoke. I drink. I stay up all 
night. I'm overcommitted on all fronts. . . . I was told that if I didn't stop 
smoking I'd be dead at 35. Well, I beat the rap." 


Raising the high-brow music world's eyebrows, Bernstein campaigned with other 
celebrities for the civil rights of blacks in the 1960s and against the Vietnam 
War in the 1970s. Criticized for "radical chic," his leftist political 
philosophy prompted him to host a storied fund-raising party for the Black 
Panthers in 1970. In 1989, he rejected a National Medal of the Arts in protest 
of the withdrawn $10,000 grant (later reinstated) of the National Endowment for 
the Arts to an art show on AIDS. 


Although Peyser made a strong case in her 1987 biography that Bernstein had 
many homosexual affairs (Bernstein promised his children never to read the 
book), there was no question that he adored his family. On Sept. 9, 1951, he 
married Chilean actress Felicia Montealegre, and, despite a short separation 
and subsequent reconciliation in 1976, remained devoted to her and went into a 
severe depression when she died of lung cancer in 1978. 


Bernstein is also survived by two daughters, Jamie and Nina, as well as his 
sister, Shirley, and brother, Burton. 


Spokeswoman Margaret Carson said the funeral would be private. 


Staunchly opposed to retiring, until last Tuesday, Bernstein continued his 
guest conducting, composing, and recording, perhaps topping his more than 200 
records with the best of his best, a re-recording of "West Side Story" in 1985. 
The effort became Deutsche Grammaphon's all-time best-selling record and 
prompted Will Crutchfield to write in the New York Times that Bernstein was in 
a class with Giuseppe Verdi. 


French President Francois Mitterrand saluted "West Side Story" anew in 1986 
when he made Bernstein a commander of the Legion of Honor. 


After a nationwide series of concerts and parties celebrating his 70th birthday 
in 1988, Bernstein said with uncharacteristic modesty: "I have no further 
requests of the fates . . . except for time. I've achieved more than I had any 
right to expect. Nobody has been as lucky as I have." 


SUPERSTAR LENNY: Too much talent, too little time, says Martin Bernheimer. A23 




Photo, COLOR, Leonard Bernstein conducting special 1989 concert in Poland. 
Agence France-Presse; Photo, Views of Bernstein: Leonard Bernstein's last 
conducting appearance, above, at Tanglewood, Mass., on Aug. 19. 1990 ALAN 
SOLOMON; Photo, Bernstein, left, as he appeared at the Hollywood Bowl in 1982, 
and guiding the Los Angeles Philharmonic, below, also in 1982. Los Angeles 
Times; Photo, (Southland Edition) Leonard Bernstein in 1988. STEVE J. SHERMAN 




Obituary; Main Story 




 LA101990-0114 
 294832 


October 19, 1990, Friday, Home Edition 




Calendar; Part F; Page 20; Column 1; Entertainment Desk 




722 words 




HOME TECH: MORE LEONARD BERNSTEIN RELEASES SET; 


MUSIC: SONY AND DEUTSCHE GRAMMOPHON PLAN EXPANDED RELEASE SCHEDULES OF 
RECORDINGS BY THE LATE CONDUCTOR. 




By DANIEL CARIAGA, TIMES MUSIC WRITER 




Recordings by Leonard Bernstein, one of the most documented conductors in 
history, will undergo expanded release programs following the conductor's death 
on Sunday, said representatives of the recording companies controlling the late 
Bernstein's catalogues. 


Executives of Sony Classical and Deutsche Grammophon, which control the bulk of 
Bernstein's recorded legacy, and BMG Classics/RCA Red Seal plan to step up 
timetables to deliver more Bernstein recordings to the marketplace. However, 
most of the repertory will be from previously released recordings, including 
some made early in his career. 


In fact, the only new recordings will be out next month -- as originally 
scheduled, reported Karen Moody, vice president of Deutsche Grammophon. These 
are recent recordings Bernstein made with the New York Philharmonic 
(Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony), the Vienna Philharmonic (two Mozart symphonies 
and the clarinet concerto) and Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam (Schubert's 
Symphonies Nos. 5 and 8). 


At Sony Classical (formerly CBS Records) in New York City, Peter Munves, 
director of marketing, said this week that in January the company will begin 
its three-year release of "The Bernstein Collection": "We will release 75 CDs 
of Bernstein performances, including not only symphonic music by Beethoven and 
others, but also oratorio performances -- works by Haydn, and the Requiems by 
Berlioz and Verdi -- and other music never before released on CD." 


At Deutsche Grammophon, also in New York, Wende Persons, director of promotion, 
reported: "We are looking at (Bernstein's) active DG discography, which 
contains over 100 different recordings, and making sure everything is 
available. 


"That's 120 titles (of standard classical repertory) and some of Bernstein's 
own (non-theatrical) music, plus another dozen videos." In his last years, 
Bernstein recorded exclusively for DG. 


In August, Deutsche Grammophon released in this country a 12-CD set of 
Bernstein recordings with the Vienna Philharmonic, Israel Philharmonic and L.A. 
Philharmonic. These recordings were made between 1977 and 1985 of music by 
Beethoven, Brahms, Bernstein, Haydn, Mozart, Stravinsky, Tchaikovsky and 
Gershwin. Called "The Bernstein Edition," it is being sold concurrently in 
Europe in a 25-CD set. 


Karen Moody, vice president of the classical label, would not reveal sales 
figures for "The Bernstein Edition," but said: "I can say that it is selling 
very well in this country, surprisingly well, given the U.S. market aversion to 
CD sets." 


In Los Angeles, Carol Brown, West Coast manager of sales and marketing for BMG 
Classics/RCA Red Seal, told The Times on Thursday that her label now plans a 
March release of recordings by Bernstein conducting the RCA Symphony in 
Copland's "Billy the Kid" and a suite from Bernstein's "On the Town," 
recordings made in the 1940s, and representing the conductor/composer's first 
commercial recordings. 


BMG also plans, according to spokesman Carl Pritzkat, the spring release of an 
early Bernstein recording as pianist -- in which he plays Copland's Piano 
Variations -- as well as other recorded documents of the young 
composer/pianist. 


The entire Bernstein catalogue encompasses well over 200 classical recordings 
and occupies more than a full page in the Schwann catalogue. 


There is very little available on Bernstein in the home-video market, which is 
no surprise considering there are so few classical music titles on cassette. 
Three tapes of programs recorded in 1971, all on Phoenix/BFA Films and Video, 
are out: 


* "Bernstein on Beethoven: a Tribute," featuring Bernstein playing sections of 
Piano Concerto No. 1 in C Major. 


* "Bernstein on Beethoven: Fidelio," with rehearsal and concert footage of 
Bernstein working with the Vienna State Opera Company. 


* "Bernstein on Beethoven: Ode to Joy From the Ninth Symphony," featuring the 
Vienna State Opera Chorus and the Vienna Philharmonic. 


Three movies whose scores he composed are also on home video: 


* MGM/UA's "On the Town" (1949), co-starring Gene Kelly and Frank Sinatra. The 
lyrics are by Adolph Green and Betty Comden. 


* MGM/UA's "West Side Story" (1961), featuring Stephen Sondheim's lyrics. 


* RCA/Columbia's "On the Waterfront" (1954), the Oscar-winner for best picture. 


Staff writer Dennis Hunt contributed to this story. 




Photo, Bernstein conducts the Vienna, Israel and L.A. orchestras on DG. 




Recording Review; Column 




 LA102090-0146 
 295402 


October 20, 1990, Saturday, Home Edition 




Calendar; Part F; Page 5; Column 1; Entertainment Desk 




378 words 




LEONARD BERNSTEIN REMEMBRANCES; 


MUSIC: MORE LOCAL TRIBUTES FOR THE CONDUCTOR-COMPOSER ARE PLANNED ON SUNDAY. 




By GREGG WAGER 




In addition to the Leonard Bernstein tribute that is part of the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic program this weekend, other local orchestras are also planning 
special remembrances. Sunday at Royce Hall, the American Youth Symphony has 
added local composer Leon Levitch's Elegy for Strings -- a personal choice from 
conductor Mehli Mehta -- to the program to honor Bernstein, who died last 
Sunday. 


Also, opening the new season of the Glendale Symphony season on Sunday at 
Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, music director Lalo Schifrin will observe a moment 
of silence to honor his longtime friend and colleague. 


Last Monday, KUSC-FM (91.5) devoted its entire day of live broadcasting, from 6 
a.m. to 10 p.m., to performances -- as conductor and pianist -- and 
compositions of Bernstein, including an unusual recording from 1956 of him 
discussing Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. 


KKGO-FM (105.1) also devoted a considerable amount air time to Bernstein's work 
on Tuesday and Wednesday. 


Another measure of grief came from the obituary section of the New York Times, 
which includes a section of special classified ads for public condolences at 
$15.85 a line. The outpouring of emotions following Bernstein's death filled 
almost 200 lines (15 inches of small type) and encompassed 14 separate 
tributes. Among the contributors were conductors Zubin Mehta and Kurt Masur, as 
well as Peter Martins of the New York Ballet and Christopher Keene of the New 
York City Opera. 


"Leonard Bernstein . . . is now being mourned by the entire world. I personally 
have lost a dear friend." wrote Mehta in his tribute. "I was proud to be 
associated with him at the New York Philharmonic and the Israel Philharmonic 
Orchestra, both of which he considered family." 


"This is perhaps not unusual for a prominent member of the Jewish community 
involved with philanthropic activities," reported Irv Horowitz, the New York 
Times obituary editor. He said the biggest similar reaction he could recall 
came after the recent death of the mother of the New York Times publisher. 
"That was considerably larger," Horowitz said. 


The Bernstein family has requested contributions in lieu of flowers be made to 
the Bernstein Education Through the Arts Fund Inc., 25 C.P.W., Suite 1B, New 
York, N.Y. 10023. 




BERNSTEIN, LEONARD; MEMORIALS; ORCHESTRAS; CONCERTS 




 LA102690-0005 
 297971 


October 26, 1990, Friday, Home Edition 




Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 3; Letters Desk 




200 words 




CONDUCTOR BERNSTEIN 




I assume that anyone who was ever touched by the genius of Leonard Bernstein 
will have his own memory of the Renaissance man of music, as you aptly 
described him (Part A, Oct. 15). 


Mine dates back to October, 1948, when I was serving as an American volunteer 
in the Israeli army during the country's War of Independence. 


With a two-day pass in hand, I hitchhiked to Jerusalem, where the Israeli 
equivalent of the USO scrounged up a ticket for the evening's performance of 
the Israel Philharmonic, with Bernstein as the guest conductor. 


The audience was a mix of black-tie patrons and soldiers dressed in fatigues. 
Bernstein raised the baton for Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, emotional at any 
time, but never more so than for a people engaged in a life-and-death struggle. 
Toward the end of the first movement, machine-gun fire started crackling from 
the old city, held by the Jordanian Legion, and continued intermittently 
through the rest of the symphony. What would have been a distracting 
disturbance at any other time, melded, with the music as entirely appropriate 
to the mood and circumstances of the occasion. Lenny and the orchestra, never 
missed a beat. 


TOM TUGEND 


Sherman Oaks 




Photo, Leonard Bernstein 




Letter to the Editor 




 LA121490-0148 
 322394 


December 14, 1990, Friday, Home Edition 




Calendar; Part F; Page 1; Column 5; Entertainment Desk 




696 words 




A BROADWAY GOODBY TO BERNSTEIN; 


MEMORIAL: LONGTIME FRIENDS AND COLLEAGUES LAUGH, CRY, SING AT NEW YORK'S 
MAJESTIC THEATER. 




By SUSAN REITER, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES 




NEW YORK 




Laughter and tears flowed freely as the Broadway theatrical community said 
goodby Thursday to Leonard Bernstein at the Majestic Theater. Longtime friends 
and colleagues -- those who knew him as Lenny -- paid tribute to the 
musical-theater dynamo with heartfelt and humorous words, and often in song. 


The capacity audience -- invited friends, relatives and theatrical 
personalities as well as 850 members of the public who started lining up at 7 
a.m. -- heard recollections of an energetic Bernstein who danced until dawn in 
discos as well as a poignant account of his final days. 


Arthur Laurents, who wrote the book for "West Side Story," hosted the 75-minute 
tribute to Bernstein, 72, who died Oct. 14. "Wherever Lenny was, was theater; 
his every move was a stage direction," he said, as many in the audience laughed 
knowingly. 


Another "West Side Story" collaborator, director-choreographer Jerome Robbins, 
had earned a laugh before he even spoke, thanks to Laurents' introductory 
words: "Fearless as Lenny was, there were two figures he did fear -- God and 
Jerome Robbins." 


After noting that he wished he were young enough to pay homage to Bernstein by 
performing the sailor's variation he created in the ballet "Fancy Free," 
Robbins, 72, recalled that halcyon 1944 collaboration between the two 
25-year-olds. He also reflected on the joyous nature of their 1957 "West Side 
Story" collaboration, even while the show faced repeated obstacles before 
reaching Broadway. 


"Lenny's music was the lifeblood of that show. His theater scores weren't just 
a collection of songs but were more like a symphonic work," noted Robbins, who 
also collaborated on several other ballet and theater works with Bernstein. He 
concluded in subdued tones, "We have lost a maker and shaker of our century. A 
light went out for me." 


Carol Lawrence, the original Maria of "West Side Story," sang a medley of "I 
Feel Pretty" and "Tonight." The "West Side Story" reunion was not as complete 
as had been scheduled; Larry Kert was unable to be there, and Stephen Sondheim 
(who, then a newcomer to Broadway, wrote the lyrics) could not attend due to 
illness in his family. 


Original cast members from Bernstein shows sang numbers they had helped launch 
into history. Nancy Walker sang her sassy "I Can Cook Too" from "On the Town." 
Her fellow cast members, Betty Comden and Adolph Green (who also teamed with 
Bernstein as the show's creators), after fondly recalling their 50-year 
friendship with Bernstein, poignantly sang the show's bittersweet finale, "Some 
Other Time." 


Barbara Cook, the original Cunegonde in Bernstein's "Candide" (1956), displayed 
her still-gleaming voice in "A Simple Song" from Bernstein's 1971 "Mass." 
"Candide" itself was represented by "Glitter and Be Gay," the coloratura aria 
Cook made famous, as performed by Constance Haumann. 


Winging in from the West Coast (as was Walker) was Lauren Bacall, who teamed up 
with Phyllis Newman for a sly rendition of "Ohio" from Bernstein's "Wonderful 
Town." Kurt Ollmann, familiar from Bernstein's 1985 "West Side Story" 
recording, sang "Take Care of This House" from Bernstein's last (1976), 
unsuccessful, Broadway show, "1600 Pennsylvania Ave." -- a work the composer 
often spoke of wanting to revise. 


Bernstein's son, Alexander, delivered a funny, knowing, affectionate talk about 
his father's unappreciated skills as an actor, singer and dancer as only a 
family member could know them. Michael Wager, a very close friend of 
Bernstein's who was with him at the end, spoke movingly of how difficult it was 
for Bernstein to continue when illness had robbed him of his creative energy. 


Marilyn Horne closed the program with "Somewhere," the emotional anthem from 
"West Side Story," after which Laurents directed the audience's attention to 
the large photo that hung over the stage: an exuberant 39-year-old Bernstein, 
nearly levitating outside the theater where "West Side Story" had opened in 
Washington. 


Since "Lenny didn't like silence," Laurents asked instead for a final round of 
applause for the man who inspired and moved so many people for so many years. 
The audience responded with a sustained standing ovation. 




MEMORIALS; BERNSTEIN, LEONARD 




 SJMN91-06162032 
 06162032 
  Photo, map; PHOTO: Associated Press; Carloads of American service members and
their families roll out of Clark Air Base in the Philippines today (Color)
(Ran only in the Street edition); MAP: Associated Press. Mount Pinatubo.
(Color)  
  VOLCANO; PHILIPPINES  
  Thousands of Americans piled into cars and buses with dogs, cats and duffel
bags and left Clark Air Base today after scientists warned that the eruption
of a nearby volcano could turn catastrophic.;    The decision to evacuate one
of the largest overseas U.S. military bases was made early today after searing
gases, ash and rock shot out of 4,795-foot Mount Pinatubo on Sunday at speeds
of up to 60 mph.  
  Front  
  ANOTHER VOLCANO ERUPTS
AMERICANS FLEE BASE IN PHILIPPINES  
     The volcano, about 10 miles west of the air base, came to life last week
after six centuries of dormancy. No casualties have been reported, but experts
are concerned that a major eruption could occur soon.;    Gases, ash and
molten rock continued to pour out of the mountain today, enshrouding it in
thick, gray clouds of ash and steam that rose 12,000 feet.;    The Philippine
Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology said it detected rhythmic ground
movements today that indicated molten material was rising to the surface of
the craters.;    Institute Director Raymundo Punongbayan said Mount Pinatubo
was in the "early eruptive stage" and "after that we will have bigger ones."; 
  He said most of the ash and molten rocks had been flowing westward away from
Clark. But he said geological studies showed that in the previous eruption 600
years ago, the main flow cut across what is now the western portion of Clark.;
   Rains fell across the area Sunday night, and officials warned residents in
the lush, green lowlands west of the mountain to move to higher ground to
escape mud flows.;    Air Force spokesman Lt. Col. Ron Rand announced the
evacuation in a 5 a.m. broadcast over the U.S. military's Far East Network. An
hour later, the first vehicles began rolling out of Clark for the U.S.-run
Subic Bay naval base, where the 14,500 troops, dependents and civilian
employees will be housed until the danger passes. Another 1,500 troops
remained at Clark to provide security.;    The Clark command center operated
with a skeletal crew, but the base's operations were suspended. The base is a
major terminal for the worldwide network of flights operated by the Military
Airlift Command.;    The miles-long convoy jammed the two-lane roads leading
to Subic, about 50 miles southwest of Clark. U.S. Marines patrolled the
highways, which pass through areas where Communist guerrillas operate, and
U.S. helicopters hovered overhead.;    By late afternoon, U.S. officials said
all the evacuees had reached Subic.;    "If it's going to blow, I hope it does
it fast so I can go home before the cockroaches take my house," said Staff
Sgt. Mike Huffman.;    Clark Air Base is in Angeles, a city of more than
300,000 people about 50 miles north of Manila. In Angeles, residents reported
no ash fell today but said the air smelled of sulfur.;    In southern Japan
today, Mount Unzen continued to shake and spew hot ash and rocks, and heavy
rain was falling on the tons of ash and rock it disgorged over the past week,
raising fears of deadly mudslides.;    Areas around the 4,452-foot volcano
covered by evacuation warnings were expanded to protect people against
possible slides of volcanic debris that could be triggered by the rain, police
said.;    An explosion of superheated gas, ashes and rocks from the mountain
one week ago claimed 38 lives, and a larger flow over the weekend razed dozens
more homes. In all, about 9,800 people have been evacuated from communities at
the foot of the mountain, said police in Nagasaki, 30 miles away.;    Mount
Unzen and Mount Pinatubo belong to the "Ring of Fire" that circles the Pacific
where shifting plates of the Earth's crust push against each other, triggering
periodic volcanic eruptions and earthquakes.;    In the Philippines, officials
have evacuated more than 12,000 people in three provinces since Mount Pinatubo
began erupting last week. About 3,100 of them are primitive Aeta tribes people
who lived on Pinatubo's slopes.;    Many of them walked or traveled by ox cart
to flee the volcano. But reporters found that some evacuees are returning to
their homes each morning to tend to livestock and crops and heading back to
evacuation centers at sundown.;    Punongbayan said he flew to the area and
warned people there would be no time to escape once a major eruption begins.; 
  There was no indication how long the Americans evacuated from Clark would
stay at Subic, but they were ordered to take along important papers and food,
water and clothing for three days.;    Subic base spokesman Bob Coble said
families at the naval installation had been asked to take in evacuees and that
others would double up in bachelor officer and enlisted quarters.;    Mount
Pinatubo, which last had a major eruption in 1380, began to show signs of
activity in April. Last week, it belched small amounts of steam and ash.;   
There are about 21 active and 200 dormant volcanoes in the Philippines. The
last major eruption occurred in 1965, when the Taal volcano, about 50 miles
south of Manila, exploded. About 200 people were killed.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  Manila, Philippines  
  Stock Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910610  
  Monday  
  June  
  1A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO; MAP  
  CA  
  868  
  Monday June 10, 1991
00162032,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG
FRONT  


 SJMN91-06163112 
 06163112 
  Photo; PHOTO: Associated Press; OUT OF HARM'S WAY -- Two mothers and their
children await aid after evacuation Monday. The tribal refugees from the
impending disaster were among thousands of Filipinos living near the volcano,
as well as most Americans at Clark Air Base, who have been forced to flee.  
  VOLCANO; FORECAST; PHILIPPINES  
  Mount Pinatubo, the Philippine volcano that erupted Saturday after six
centuries of quiet, is likely to explode in the next few days or weeks with
force comparable to the Mount St. Helens explosion, a U.S. government
scientist said Monday.;    "I think we could see a major explosive eruption
any time," said Peter Lipman, a volcanologist at the U.S. Geological Survey
office in Menlo Park. Lipman is in daily contact with five USGS scientists in
the Philippines who have been studying the volcano since April, when it first
stirred.  
  Front  
  HUGE ERUPTION LIKELY IN PHILIPPINES 'ANY
TIME'  
     A huge cloud of ash-laden steam rose up to 11,500 feet above the volcano
today, spreading ash over a six-mile radius, the Philippine Institute of
Vulcanology and Seismology said.;    If it does erupt, the deadly hot ash
produced by the volcano could sweep across adjoining Clark Air Base, he said.
Also in peril are the 350,000 residents of Angeles City, where the air base is
located, about 50 miles north of Manila.;    Even if the volcano does not
erupt, the threat of eruption is likely to keep the base closed for weeks at
least, Lipman said.;    Scientists doubt it's more than coincidence that the
eruption is occurring at the same time as the Mount Unzen volcano in Japan, he
said.;    The five USGS scientists are among the few remaining people at Clark
Air Base, which was evacuated along with thousands of Filipinos living near
the volcano.;    The researchers, along with 10 Filipino scientists and their
equipment, today  moved to a bunker on the east edge of the air base, 12 miles
from the volcano, where they should be safe from ash avalanches.;    Mount
Pinatubo is typical of hundreds of volcanoes that make up the "Ring of Fire"
on the Pacific coasts of Asia and the Americas. (These volcanoes -- including
Mount Lassen in Shasta County, and Mount Rainier and Mount St. Helens in
Washington, all in the Cascade Range -- arise where one of the earth's immense
crust plates is slowly diving beneath another.);    Pinatubo's last eruption,
600 years ago, is thought to have yielded at least as much molten rock -- half
a cubic kilometer -- as Mount St. Helens did when it erupted in 1980. Until
volcanologists' attention was drawn to it by a cluster of earthquakes beneath
the volcano this spring, it had not been studied well.;    Other recent
volcanoes that erupted on the same scale were El Chichon in Mexico in 1983 and
Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia in 1985.;    If it does have a massive eruption,
Pinatubo's primary means of causing death and destruction would be hellish
avalanches of hot ash -- 1,000 degrees or more, flowing and billowing at up to
100 mph, engulfing and searing all in their path.;    "In the worst case, a
really big eruption, all of Clark Air Force Base could be covered" with
glowing ash, Lipman said.;    Just being caught in a cloud of ash blowing off
the avalanche is fatal. That is what killed 38 people in Japan last week.;   
Such ash also would wreak havoc with the engines of planes at the air base,
Lipman said.;    Planes flying through clouds of volcanic ash --
indistinguishable on radar from rain clouds -- run the risk of having their
engines stalled by the grit.;    So far, the winds have blown ash away from
the base. But winds of the summer monsoon weather pattern, expected to begin
any day, would send ash directly toward the base.;    The volcano's activity
-- measured by seismometers detecting slight earthquakes in its molten rock
plumbing system -- is increasing in a way that suggests a large eruption is
imminent, Lipman said.;    The scientists also are monitoring tiltmeters on
the volcano's slopes, to watch it swell as magma builds inside. On clear days
they fly above the crater to measure sulfur emissions.;    Their predictions
might be a false alarm -- the volcano may have done its worst already. But it
would take several weeks of declining quakes and sulfur emissions before
scientists would be reasonably confident that the military could return to the
base.;    Volcanologists know of no reason the volcano's activity could be
linked to the volcano in Japan, which is of comparable size.;    "No reputable
scientist I know of" is drawing a connection between the two, Lipman said.;   
More than 500 volcanoes have erupted in historical time, he noted. "Two out of
500 is no big deal."  
  DAVID ANSLEY, Mercury News Staff Writer  
  USA  
  Stock Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910611  
  Tuesday  
  June  
  6A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  773  
  Tuesday June 11, 1991
00163112,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06164210 
 06164210 
  Photo, diagram; PHOTO: Associated Press; U.S. troops on guard at Clark Air
Base as huge plume rises from Mount Pinatubo eruption. (Color); DIAGRAM: Jeff
Fulaski--Knight0Ridder News Service. How volcanoes are formed.  
  VOLCANO; PHILIPPINES  
  Mount Pinatubo erupted with six thundering explosions today, shooting a giant
plume of ash 15 miles high. Molten rock and hot gas poured from the volcano,
and nearby residents fled in panic.;    A Filipino serving with the U.S. Navy
became the first reported fatality related to the eruption when his car
collided with a bus on an ash-slicked road north of the Subic Bay naval base.  
  Front  
  THERE WAS PANIC EVERYWHERE
VOLCANO ON A RAMPAGE
ASH FILLS THE SKY; LAVA, GAS GUSH  
     Residents of nearby Angeles panicked when a huge, gray-greenish mushroom
cloud burst from the volcano and turned day to night. Thousands of fleeing
people packed roads.;    "Stones as big as my head were falling down from the
mountains," said Rolly Soria, 18.;    "There was panic everywhere," said
Manuel Romualdo. "Children were crying. We had to grab whatever we could.";   
Scientists warned of more, possibly larger eruptions from the 4,795-foot
volcano, which was dormant for six centuries until it began spewing steam in
April.;    "This could be only the beginning," said Raymundo Punongbayan,
director of the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology.;   
Angeles, a city of 300,000, is adjacent to Clark Air Base, but authorities had
not ordered a general evacuation there.;    Hundreds of Americans fled Clark,
home to 15,000 American military personnel and their families. Most of the
base's residents had been evacuated Monday. The base did not appear
immediately threatened by volcanic flow.;    Seismologists said searing gas,
ash and molten rock raced at great speed down the mountain's western and
northern slopes. They said most of the debris flowed into the Marella,
Maraunot and O'Donnell rivers and that there had been no reports that property
or homes had been damaged.;    About 3,000 Aeta tribesman, descendants of the
original inhabitants of the Philippines, fled the slopes of Mount Pinatubo.;  
 At a refugee center in Olongapo, 35 miles southwest of the volcano, survivors
told of the sky growing dark, then of hearing a tremendous explosion followed
by a rain of ash.;    They said they scampered for safety with their
belongings and livestock over roads slippery with ashfall, many wearing
cardboard boxes to protect themselves from the ash.;    "They were stunned by
the eruption," television reporter Bert Basa said. "Their faces turned ashen,
and it looked like their hair was standing on end.";    Ash was so thick in
the air that at noon, motorists were driving with their headlights and
windshield wipers on.;    A photographer who circled the volcano in an
airplane said an aerial gunnery range at Clark was covered with ash, as were
mountains in the Zambales range, normally lush, green tropical peaks.;   
Today's first eruption began at 8:40 a.m. with a tremendous blast that sent
forth a mushroom cloud. It was followed by a second explosion a few minutes
later and a third, smaller blast at 11:49 a.m.;    The huge plume could be
seen in Manila, 60 miles to the south, and reporters at the scene said it
blocked out the sun. The cloud drifted westward into the South China Sea.;   
Two more thundering explosions rocked Mount Pinatubo late today.;    The
Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology said the explosions
occurred at 10:52 p.m. and 11:05 p.m. The second explosion sent a plume of ash
and steam 80,000 feet into the sky.;    Shortly after midnight, a sixth
explosion was reported.;    Seismologists said the volcano had plenty of
built-up magma and even more severe eruptions could come later.;    "The
crisis has not ended yet," said Punongbayan, of the Philippine Institute of
Vulcanology and Seismology. "We have signs that the volcano is preparing for
another one.";    Punongbayan warned people within a 15-mile radius of
Pinatubo to flee.;    "The smoke is very thick like a dark mushroom in the
sky," television reporter Gus Abelgas said in a broadcast from Botolan, near
the volcano's western slopes. He said strong tremors preceded the nighttime
eruptions and continued afterward.;    President Corazon Aquino visited
refugee centers near Angeles briefly before returning to Manila for
independence day celebrations.;    The Americans who fled Clark with a few
belongings Monday moved in with sailors and their families at Subic Bay naval
base, 50 miles to the southwest.;    Clark is one of the biggest U.S. bases
overseas. Punongbayan said Tuesday that the site was in the path of the
volcanic flow from Mount Pinatubo during its last major eruption, in 1380.;   
About 19,000 Filipinos earlier had been evacuated from three provinces near
the volcano's slopes and were housed in 25 makeshift evacuation centers
outside the projected danger zone.;    Officials said more were evacuated
after today's eruption.;    About 10 people in Moraza, a village on the
western slope of the mountain, were refusing to leave, relief officials said.
They told rescuers that they would not leave their livestock and if the
animals die, "we will die with them.";    On April 2, Pinatubo produced a
small hydrothermal explosion caused by underground water meeting hot rocks
deep inside. On June 3, the volcano spewed ash in a mild eruption.;    That
same day, 4,452-foot Mount Unzen in Japan erupted with an explosion of
superheated gas, ashes and rocks that killed 38 people.;    Experts say there
is apparently no connection between Unzen and Pinatubo.;    There are about 21
active and 200 dormant volcanoes in the Philippines. The last major eruption
was the Taal volcano, about 50 miles south of Manila, in 1965. That explosion
killed about 200 people.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  Manila, Philippines  
  Stock Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910612  
  Wednesday  
  June  
  1A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  DIAGRAM; PHOTO  
  CA  
  917  
  Wednesday June 12, 1991
00164210,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG
FRONT  


 SJMN91-06165048 
 06165048 
  Photo, maps (2); PHOTO: Associated Press; U.S. soldiers at Clark Air Base in
the Philippines eye a cloud of volcanic ash from Mount Pinatubo on Wednesday.
Most of the 16,000 Americans who live or work at the base had been evacuated.;
MAP: Knight-Ridder News Service; World's deadliest volcano eruptions; MAP:
Alan Baseden -- Mercury News; Philippines, Eruption site  
  VOLCANO; PHILIPPINES; DISASTER  
  Three major new eruptions rocked Mount Pinatubo late Wednesday night and early
today, forcing another emergency evacuation of Clark Air Base and increasing
fears of even more violent explosions from the long-dormant volcano in the
days ahead.;    Mudslides also threatened after fierce thunderstorms and
lightning Wednesday illuminated afternoon skies eerily darkened by giant
volcanic clouds. As much as two inches of coarse gray ash and fist-sized
pieces of pumice fell along a 50-mile stretch southwest of the volcano.  
  Front  
  VOLCANO'S FURY FORCES MORE TO FLEE
FIST-SIZED ROCKS RAIN IN PHILIPPINES  
  Mercury News wire services contributed to this report.
See also related story on page 22A of this section.  
     An eruption this morning caused an earthquake so strong it "sent
seismograph needles off the chart," and registered 60 miles south in Manila,
said Jessie Daligdig, a government geologist.;    Villagers tied wet kerchiefs
on their faces and used rakes, shovels and pieces of wood to push the blanket
of snow-like ash from roads. At times, winds whipped the grit into the air,
forcing cars to use windshield wipers and headlights in blizzard-like
conditions through the afternoon.;    Two people have been reported killed so
far, a Filipino serving in the U.S. Navy who died in a traffic accident on an
ash-slick road and a Filipino boy reported to have died after inhaling
sulfuric fumes that began to seep from the volcano last weekend.;    The
initial explosions on Mount Pinatubo at 8:51 a.m. Wednesday sent a
10-mile-high mushroom cloud of swirling ash and rock fragments into the skies
over Clark Air Base, forcing the Air Force to evacuate hundreds of American
volunteers who had stayed behind to guard it and to tend sensitive
communications equipment.;    Most of the 16,000 Americans who live and work
at Clark were evacuated Monday, when scientists said it was clear that the
volcano, dormant for more than six centuries, was returning to life.;    U.S.
officials have refused to say whether nuclear weapons are stored at Clark, but
they denied news reports suggesting a radiation danger if weapons depots on
the base were hit by molten rock.;    Many of the villages in the vicinity
were holding Independence Day celebrations when heavy gray clouds first began
raining ash Wednesday morning. The mayor in San Marcelino, 17 miles southwest
of the volcano, was giving a speech to several thousand people when dark
clouds suddenly blotted the sun and turned day to night.;    Calixto Macalma
Jr., a police intelligence officer, said people panicked as it began "raining
sand." Church bells pealed in alarm, sirens wailed and many ran for shelter.; 
  Philippine civil defense officials said that they had evacuated 19,369
people from villages within a 12-mile radius of the volcano by late Wednesday.
Along the roads, some people wore cardboard boxes on their heads for
protection; some rode their water buffaloes to safety.;    At least 330
villagers, who had ignored earlier warnings to flee Aglao hamlet, finally
abandoned their homes Wednesday afternoon.;    "There were big stones, like
this," said one woman who escaped, holding out her fists. "We are very
scared.";    Thousands of residents of Angeles City, east of the volcano,
initially fled in panic from the booming morning blasts and greenish-gray
mushroom cloud that towered over the area. Passenger jeeps sped through the
streets, refusing to stop for riders as the drivers drove for cover. Most
residents later returned to the sprawling city.;    But officials issued no
general evacuation order for Angeles, even though the city is next to Clark
Air Base. U.S. geologists advising the Philippine government said most of
Angeles was not at risk, apparently basing their assessment on earth samples
indicating that earlier eruptions had reached the area on which Clark now
stands but had spared what is now Angeles.;    President Corazon Aquino
helicoptered to refugee centers near Angeles briefly before returning to
Manila for an Independence Day rally and parade at Luneta Park. She authorized
the release of $1.42 million for relief efforts.;    Raymundo Punongbayan,
director of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, said
scientists could not estimate how much magma was still pent up inside Mount
Pinatubo, but said more eruptions at least as violent are expected within the
next three days.;    "All we can do is wait," he said. "The crisis is not
over."  
  Los Angeles Times  
  USA  
  San Marcelino, Philippines  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910613  
  Thursday  
  June  
  1A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO; MAP  
  CA  
  764  
  Thursday June 13, 1991
00165048,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG
FRONT  


 SJMN91-06167046 
 06167046 
  PHILIPPINES; VOLCANO  
  Mount Pinatubo rumbled today with explosions that hurled ash and gas more than
12 miles high, and a typhoon brought heavy rain that could unleash tons of
debris from the jagged slopes.;    Seven explosions were recorded from the
4,800-foot tropical volcano today, and scientists said more were expected.  
  Front  
  NEW EXPLOSIONS ROCK PHILIPPINES' MOUNT PINATUBO  
  The Los Angeles Times contributed to this report.  
     Typhoon Yunya, packing 80 mph winds, slammed into the eastern coast of
Luzon island, which includes Mount Pinatubo, early in the day. But it quickly
weakened to a tropical storm with 60 mph winds by the time it was centered
about 70 miles east of the volcano.;    Still, heavy rains churned up by the
typhoon drenched Manila and the provinces near the volcano, raising fears of
mudflows that could bury whole towns up to 25 miles away.;    Meanwhile,
President Corazon Aquino dismissed a British newspaper report that Americans
had warned her of possible radioactive contamination if the volcano damages
nuclear storage sites at Clark Air Base, abandoned Monday by nearly 15,000
Americans.;    The U.S. military began flying home hundreds of the 28,000
Americans who crowded onto Subic Bay Naval Base as a bizarre tropical blizzard
of thick volcanic ash caused power failures across the base Friday during a
third day of increasingly violent eruptions of Mount Pinatubo.;    Showers of
'mud drops';  "It looks like it's snowing outside," said military spokeswoman
Capt. Kim Urie. Headlights and street lamps were turned on at midafternoon as
a "dark, black cloud" passed over the giant Navy base and dropped a gritty
rain of "mud drops," she said.;    At least four people have died, 24 have
been hurt and four have been listed as missing since Pinatubo began erupting
Sunday, after lying dormant for six centuries, officials said. About 84,000
people, including Americans, have been evacuated.;    Police said 12 people
had been arrested for looting at Clark.;    Five explosions shook the mountain
early today, showering ash over a wide area and providing a spectacular
pre-dawn display of nature's fireworks against a backdrop of lightning and
rain.;    Friday, eight thunderous explosions shot a cloud of ash and steam
nearly 19 miles high.;    Friday's eruptions hurled ash over Clark, 10 miles
east of the volcano, and Subic, 25 miles southwest, where the Clark personnel
had been temporarily housed. Gray ash also fell in Manila, 60 miles south.;   
At Subic, base spokesman Robert Coble said generators had to be shut down from
time to time to clean out volcanic ash, plunging the base into darkness.;   
River temperatures rising;  Temperatures in local rivers were rising because
of the volcanic debris, officials said.;    After sunset, the volcano spewed
two streams of orange, glowing material from its crater in what scientists
thought was the first appearance of lava during the weeklong eruptions.;   
Raymundo Punongbayan, director of the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and
Seismology, said Friday's blasts were part of a single eruption, the largest
since Mount Pinatubo awoke Sunday from its 600-year slumber.;    A British
newspaper, the Guardian, reported Thursday that the Americans declared a
nuclear alert at Clark late Wednesday and informed governments in Manila and
Hong Kong that "a nuclear accident in the region was possible." But Aquino
told reporters the story was "baseless and purely fabricated.";    The United
States refuses to confirm or deny that it stores nuclear weapons in the
Philippines.;    Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus also said the eruption
should have no effect on talks on the future of Clark and Subic, where leases
expire Sept. 16. The talks are deadlocked over compensation and the duration
of a new agreement.;    Punongbayan said Mount Pinatubo could remain active
for years if it follows the pattern of similar Philippine volcanoes. That
would leave Clark unusable.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  MANILA, Philippines  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910615  
  Saturday  
  June  
  4A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  CA  
  615  
  Saturday June 15, 1991
00167046,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06255336 
 06255336 
  Photo; PHOTO: Associated Press; Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas is sworn
in before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday. Both supporters and
opponents of the federal judge are lobbying senators.  
  US; COURT; JUDGE; CANDIDATE; MEETING; CONGRESS  
  While the 14-member Senate Judiciary Committee presses Clarence Thomas to
explain his qualifications for the Supreme Court, all 100 senators are under
mounting pressure to explain their views of the judge.;   There were these
signs of pressure Tuesday:  
  Front  
  SENATORS PRESSED FOR OPINIONS ON JUDGE
PARTISAN GROUPS TARGET LAWMAKERS  
  U.S. Supreme Court: The Thomas Nomination; See also related stories on pages
1A and 8-9A of this section.  
     (check) About 300 black pastors, representing congregations totaling more
than 1 million churchgoers in 30 states, held a rally on the steps of the
Supreme Court and then lobbied their senators to support confirmation of
President Bush's Supreme Court nominee.;   The ministers were recently
organized into a conservative Coalition for the Restoration of the Black
Family and Society, with the first item on its agenda being Thomas'
confirmation.;   (check) A television ad supporting Thomas, shown in four
Southern states where senators face re-election campaigns next year, attracted
10,000 calls between Friday and Sunday, according to Gary Bauer, organizer of
the conservative Citizens Committee to Confirm Clarence Thomas, which financed
the ad's production.;   The ad carries a toll-free telephone number that
viewers are asked to call to register their support for Thomas; callers are
then sorted by states, and the state lists will be sent to the targeted
senators.;   (check) On the other side of the Thomas confirmation issue, the
National Abortion Rights Action League reported that senators had begun to
receive the first of 500,000 anti-Thomas post cards the group has provided to
the constituents of targeted lawmakers whose votes against Thomas'
confirmation are regarded as critical.;   (check) The Lawyers' Committee for
Civil Rights Under Law, a bipartisan group organized in 1963 to assist the
government in civil-rights law enforcement, announced that 86 of about 110
members of its board of directors had decided to oppose Thomas' confirmation.
The announcement said Thomas' legal philosophy reflected a "hostility to and
rejection of the core of civil rights jurisprudence."  
  Baltimore Sun  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910911  
  Wednesday  
  September  
  8A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  349  
  Wednesday, September 11, 1991
00255336,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06255421 
 06255421 
  Photo; PHOTO: Virginia Thomas  
  US; COURT; JUDGE; CANDIDATE; SPOUSE; PROBE  
  Virginia Thomas is a soft-spoken, hard-working daughter of the heartland: a
brainy Omaha, Neb., lawyer who has scaled the sheer cliffs of professional
Washington; a churchgoer who invites homeless people out to lunch; a good
friend.;   Why the fuss over Mrs. Supreme Court Nominee?  
  Front  
  THOMAS' WIFE ALSO UNDERGOES SCRUTINY  
     Her critics see her as more than the supportive spouse who'll accompany her
husband, Clarence, through his Senate confirmation hearings, which began
Tuesday and are likely to run through next week. They see a woman with strong
opinions on issues that are bound to come before the court.;   Some
women's-rights activists are upset by her lobbying against such issues as
comparable-worth legislation. Some religious-rights groups are troubled by her
anti-cult activities in light of her former involvement with Lifespring, a
motivational group.;   Her race draws criticism; Even the color of her skin is
being used to determine the content of Clarence Thomas's character. The fact
that she is white has drawn criticism from some blacks who see the marriage as
evidence that Clarence Thomas has rejected his roots.;   In their respective
careers, the Thomases have embraced the view that women and minorities are
hindered, rather than helped, by affirmative action and government programs.
True equality is achieved by holding everyone to the same standard, they
believe.;   Virginia Thomas has represented the conservative viewpoint in her
jobs as a staffer for a Republican congressman, spokeswoman at the U.S.
Chamber of Congress and deputy assistant secretary at the Department of
Labor.;   Clarence Thomas advocates a colorblind society, and his marriage may
be an example of that philosophy. But others see a different symbolism.;  
'Sign of rejection'; "His marrying a white woman is a sign of his rejection of
the black community," said Russell Adams, chairman of Howard University's
department of Afro-American studies. "Great justices have had community roots
that served as a basis for understanding the Constitution. Clarence's lack of
a sense of community makes his nomination troubling.";   Some religious
leaders are troubled as well. Dean Kelley, the National Council of Churches'
counselor on religious liberty, wrote a critique of Clarence Thomas that was
used as grounds for his organization's opposition to the Supreme Court
nominee. The author did not mention Virginia Thomas in his text but has said
he was concerned about her involvement in the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), a
Chicago-based organization that says it educates the public about
"destructive" cults. That involvement, he said, might affect her husband's
handling of religious-liberty cases if he shares her views on the subject.;  
During the early '80s, Virginia Thomas enrolled in Lifespring, a self-help
course that challenges students to take responsibility for their lives. She
was troubled by some of the activities and eventually broke with the
organization. Since 1985, she has been a public advocate against cult
activities.;   When she served as a labor-relations attorney at the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce from 1985 to 1989, she represented the interests of the
business community at congressional hearings on such issues as comparable
worth, affirmative action and federal child-care legislation.  
  Washington Post  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Stock Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910911  
  Wednesday  
  September  
  8A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  517  
  Wednesday, September 11, 1991
00255421,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06255434 
 06255434 
  Photo; PHOTO: Knight-Ridder News Service; HI, HONEY -- Supreme Court nominee
Clarence Thomas waves to his wife, Virginia, on Tuesday amid a flurry of media
attention on day one of his Senate confirmation hearings.  
  US; COURT; JUDGE; CANDIDATE; SPOUSE; PROFILE  
  Virginia Thomas is a soft-spoken, hard-working daughter of the heartland. A
brainy Omaha, Neb., lawyer who has scaled the sheer cliffs of professional
Washington. A churchgoer who invites homeless people out to lunch. A good
friend.;   Why the fuss over Mrs. Supreme Court Nominee?  
  Front  
  THOMAS' SPOUSE ALSO IN SPOTLIGHT
CRITICS SAY HER VIEWS COULD INFLUENCE CASES  
  U.S. Supreme Court: The Thomas Nomination; See also related stories on pages
1A and 8A of this section.  
     Her critics see her as more than the supportive spouse who'll accompany her
husband, Clarence, through his Senate confirmation hearings, which began
Tuesday and are likely to run through next week. They see a woman with strong
opinions on issues that are bound to come before the court.;   Some
women's-rights activists are upset by her lobbying against such issues as
comparable-worth legislation. Some religious rights groups are troubled by her
anti-cult activities in light of her former involvement with Lifespring, a
motivational group.;   Skin color an issue; Even the color of her skin is
being used to determine the content of Clarence Thomas's character. The fact
that she is white has drawn criticism from some blacks who see the marriage as
evidence that Clarence Thomas has rejected his roots.;   In their respective
careers, the Thomases have embraced the view that women and minorities are
hindered, rather than helped, by affirmative action and government programs.
True equality is achieved by holding everyone to the same standard, they
believe.;   "I don't think it's fair to say she's anti-women's rights," said
Ricky Silberman, vice chairwoman of the EEOC and a friend of the Thomases. She
said Virginia Thomas opposed legislation on comparable worth because it would
have involved the government in determining wages, which is "not good for the
economy, not good for workers, not good for women.";   Conservative viewpoint;
Virginia Thomas has represented the conservative viewpoint in her jobs as a
staffer for a Republican congressman, spokeswoman at the U.S. Chamber of
Congress and deputy assistant secretary at the Department of Labor.;  
Clarence Thomas advocates a colorblind society, and his marriage may be an
example of that philosophy. But others see a different symbolism.;   "His
marrying a white woman is a sign of his rejection of the black community,"
said Russell Adams, chairman of Howard University's department of
Afro-American studies. "Great justices have had community roots that served as
a basis for understanding the Constitution. Clarence's lack of a sense of
community makes his nomination troubling.";   Religious leaders wonder; Some
religious leaders are troubled as well. Dean Kelley, the National Council of
Churches' counselor on religious liberty, wrote a critique of Clarence Thomas
that was used as grounds for his organization's opposition to the Supreme
Court nominee. The author did not mention Virginia Thomas in his text, but has
said he was concerned about her involvement in the Cult Awareness Network
(CAN), a Chicago-based organization that says it educates the public about
"destructive" cults. That involvement, he said, might affect her husband's
handling of religious-liberty cases if he shares her views on the subject.;  
During the early '80s, Virginia Thomas enrolled in Lifespring, a self-help
course that challenges students to take responsibility for their lives. A
small percentage of the program's 300,000 graduates have been deeply disturbed
by Lifespring's methods, which involve intense emotional self-examination.;  
A clean break; Virginia Thomas was troubled by some of Lifespring's activities
and eventually broke with the organization. Since 1985, she has been a public
advocate against cult activities.;   When she served as a labor-relations
attorney at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce from 1985 to 1989, she represented
the interests of the business community at congressional hearings on such
issues as comparable worth, affirmative action and federal child-care
legislation.  
  LAURA BLUMENFELD, Washington Post  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910911  
  Wednesday  
  September  
  9A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  651  
  Wednesday, September 11, 1991
00255434,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 SJMN91-06256107 
 06256107 
  Photos (2); PHOTO: Clarence Thomas (color); PHOTO: Knight-Ridder News Service;
Thomas with wife Virginia during hearings.  
  US; COURT; JUDGE; CANDIDATE; APPOINTMENT; ABORTION; CONTROVERSY  
  Frustrated Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee say Supreme Court
nominee Clarence Thomas is an evasive witness, but no groundswell of
opposition to his confirmation seems to be emerging.;   Several senators were
openly skeptical Wednesday over Thomas' insistence that he has no opinion on
the 1973 Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion.  
  Front  
  SENATORS DOUBTING THOMAS
ONE CALLS HIM 'ONLY PERSON IN ROOM' WITHOUT
OPINION ON ABORTION  
  Additional information attached to the end of this article.  
     If that's so, said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., "he's the only person gathered
in the room who does not have an opinion.";   Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., added,
"I'm concerned about his candor, his willingness to be forthcoming." Kohl was
today's leadoff questioner as the hearings entered their third day.;   Two
pivotal members of the 14-member committee -- Howell Heflin, D-Ala., and Arlen
Specter, R-Pa. -- also voiced concern about Thomas' answers. But the panel's
traditional third swing vote, Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., said Thomas was doing
well.;   Heflin cited the "appearance of a confirmation conversion" and said
it may raise questions of Thomas' "integrity and temperament.";   But Heflin
added, "I am not at this time of any firm opinion one way or the other" on
whether Thomas should be confirmed.;   And Simon said Thomas' performance thus
far "has neither helped him nor hurt him.";   Specter blamed fellow committee
members more than Thomas in concluding, "We really haven't moved very far in
the process.";   Thomas, a black federal appeals judge, was picked by
President Bush to replace the retiring Thurgood Marshall, the high court's
only black justice.;   DeConcini said he thought the conservative Thomas
"handled the privacy questions very well" without taking a stand on abortion.
"I don't see how you could ask him to do anything more.";   Thomas expanded
earlier testimony by saying Wednesday that he believed the right of marital
privacy was "fundamental" -- a status that accords it the fullest judicial
protection from government intrusion.;   But he repeatedly refused to state
his views on the 1973 abortion decision based on women's right of privacy. To
give such an answer, he said, "would undermine my ability to sit in an
impartial way on such an important case.";   Thomas, who sat alone at the
witness table with no notes or reference materials, also claimed a lack of
familiarity with the subject matter when asked about some of his former
speeches and articles.;   That moved committee Chairman Joseph Biden, D-Del.,
to give Thomas a stack of the judge's past speeches so the nominee could "help
me understand them" during future questioning.;   Thomas, testifying calmly
but warily, did offer fuller comment on another hot issue before the high
court: prayer in public schools.;   After Simon discussed the feelings decades
ago of a Jewish elementary schoolboy who left the room each day while his
classmates recited a prayer, Thomas said, "Any policy of exclusion should be
considered inappropriate.";   Outside the hearing room, abortion-rights
advocates said Thomas should not be allowed to disavow past comments they say
show he would vote to ban most, if not all, abortions.;   "His most
unimpressive testimony poses two equally disturbing possibilities: he is
either willfully misleading the committee about his views to win confirmation,
or he is a man whose convictions have shallow roots," said Arthur Kropp of
People for the American Way.;   Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., said he could not
understand how Thomas' prior statements touching on the 1973 abortion decision
could have been made without considering its content. "I'm not satisfied with
the answers," Leahy said.;   Although Thomas appeared to back away from
comments made in past speeches or articles, he told the committee, "My view is
that I have been consistent.";   Thomas' opponents believe Republicans Strom
Thurmond of South Carolina, Orrin Hatch of Utah, Charles Grassley of Iowa,
Alan Simpson of Wyoming and Hank Brown of Colorado are solid Thomas backers.; 
 But they hope Sens. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., and Howard Metzenbaum,
D-Ohio, will be joined by the three swing-vote senators and Biden, Leahy,
Simon and Kohl in voting against the nominee.;   Biden and Kennedy declined
comment Wednesday on their leanings.;   Metzenbaum said Thomas' refusal to
give direct answers "makes it more difficult to vote for him."; THOMAS' VIEWS;
Excerpts from Clarence Thomas' testimony:; On abortion: "I have no reason or
agenda to prejudge the issue . . . or a predilection to rule one way or
another on the issue of abortion."; On affirmative action: "The line that I
drew was a line that said that we shouldn't have preferences, or goals, or
timetables or quotas."; On natural law: "At no time did I feel, nor do I feel
now, that natural law is anything more than the background to our
Constitution."; HEAR IT, SEE IT; Senate confirmation hearings for Supreme
Court nominee Clarence Thomas are scheduled to run through Friday this week
and every weekday except Wednesday next week.; RADIO; (box) KQED, 88.5 FM Tape
delay beginning at 9 a.m.; repeated at 9:30 p.m.; (box) KPFA, 94.1 FM Live
coverage begins at 6:30 a.m.; TELEVISION; (box) C-SPAN Live coverage begins at
7 a.m.; repeated at 5 p.m.; (box) CNN Intermittent coverage.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Street  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910912  
  Thursday  
  September  
  1A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  864  
  Thursday, September 12, 1991
00256107,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG
FRONT  


 SJMN91-06256124 
 06256124 
  Photos (2); PHOTO: Clarence Thomas (color); PHOTO: Knight-Ridder News Service;
Thomas with wife Virginia during hearings.  
  US; COURT; JUDGE; CANDIDATE; APPOINTMENT; ABORTION; CONTROVERSY  
  Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas told the Senate Judiciary Committee
today it is "irrelevant" whether he holds any personal opinion on abortion,
spurring new frustration among the committee's Democrats.;   But as the
hearings' third day got under way, no groundswell of opposition to his
confirmation seemed to be emerging.  
  Front  
  SENATORS DOUBTING THOMAS
COURT NOMINEE SAYS HIS PERSONAL OPINION OF
ABORTION IS 'IRRELEVANT'  
  Additional information attached to the end of this article.  
     Asked several times by Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., about women's right to end
their pregnancies, Thomas said, "Whether or not I have a view is irrelevant.";
  President Bush, asked at a news conference whether Thomas' claim not to have
an opinion on abortion is credible, answered, "That's a question for the
Senate to decide.";   "He's handling himself very well," the president said.
"I think he's doing a beautiful job up there. I feel more confident than ever
that he will be confirmed.";   Thomas' answers have frustrated the committee's
Democrats, who say he is an evasive witness. They also have voiced skepticism
about his backing away from stands he took in past writings and speeches.;  
Committee Chairman Joseph Biden, D-Del., began to show signs of exasperation
today during spirited questioning about the nominee's views on "natural law,"
a theory that certain rights exist independent of written law.;   At one
point, Biden accused Thomas of using "tortuous logic." Later, he referred to
one of Thomas' replies as "the most unartful dodge I've heard." After still
another Thomas answer, Biden said, "That's not the question I asked you,
judge.";   Republicans tried to deflect criticism over Thomas' refusal to
answer questions from the Democrats.;   "It is, in my view, inappropriate to
keep this up," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah. He said Thomas had been asked
more than 70 questions about his abortion views even though Justice David H.
Souter was asked only 36 such questions during his confirmation hearings last
year.;   "What are we going to have? Sixty-four-thousand questions on abortion
before we're done with this approach?" Hatch asked. "Enough is enough.";  
Thomas said Senate confirmation of his nomination would give him "an
opportunity to serve and give back" and to "bring something different to the
court.";   "I can walk in the shoes of the people who are affected by what the
court does," Thomas said.;   Several senators were openly skeptical Wednesday
over Thomas' insistence that he has no opinion on the 1973 Supreme Court
decision legalizing abortion.;   If that's so, said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill.,
"he's the only person gathered in the room who does not have an opinion.";  
Kohl added, "I'm concerned about his candor, his willingness to be
forthcoming.";   Today, Kohl asked the nominee, "Is it fair of you to say to
us, for the most part, just view me on what I'm saying here this week?";  
Kohl asked the black federal judge whether he was offended by published
comments calling his appointment by President Bush a "quota.";   "That would
trouble anyone," Thomas said, adding, "I don't think it's accurate." He said
Bush assured him he was picked because he was the best qualified of those
potential nominees considered.;   Thomas is expected to continue testifying
through Friday. The committee next week will hear from other witnesses.;   Two
pivotal members of the 14-member committee -- Howell Heflin, D-Ala., and Arlen
Specter, R-Pa. -- also voiced concern about Thomas' answers. But the panel's
traditional third swing vote, Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., said Thomas was doing
well.;   Thomas' opponents believe Republicans Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina, Hatch, Charles Grassley of Iowa, Alan Simpson of Wyoming and Hank
Brown of Colorado are solid Thomas backers.;   But they hope Sens. Edward M.
Kennedy, D-Mass., and Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, will be joined by the three
swing-vote senators and Biden, Patrick Leahy of Vermont, Simon and Kohl in
voting against the nominee.; THOMAS' VIEWS; Excerpts from Clarence Thomas'
testimony:; On abortion: "I have no reason or agenda to prejudge the issue . .
. or a predilection to rule one way or another on the issue of abortion."; On
affirmative action: "The line that I drew was a line that said that we
shouldn't have preferences, or goals, or timetables or quotas."; On natural
law: "At no time did I feel, nor do I feel now, that natural law is anything
more than the background to our Constitution."; HEAR IT, SEE IT; Senate
confirmation hearings for Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas are scheduled
to run through Friday this week and every weekday except Wednesday next week.;
RADIO; (box) KQED, 88.5 FM Tape delay beginning at 9 a.m.; repeated at 9:30
p.m.; (box) KPFA, 94.1 FM Live coverage begins at 6:30 a.m.; TELEVISION; (box)
C-SPAN Live coverage begins at 7 a.m.; repeated at 5 p.m.; (box) CNN
Intermittent coverage.  
  Associated Press  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Stock Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910912  
  Thursday  
  September  
  1A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  806  
  Thursday, September 12, 1991
00256124,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG
FRONT  


 SJMN91-06261053 
 06261053 
  Photo; PHOTO: Associated Press; GOING WAY BACK -- Supreme Court nominee
Clarence Thomas greets Sister Virgilius Reidy, his eighth-grade teacher,
before Monday's continuation of his confirmation hearings.  
  US; CONGRESS; COURT; JUDGE; APPOINTMENT; PROBE  
  Clarence Thomas completed five grueling days of Senate questioning Monday,
apparently well on his way to becoming the second black justice in the history
of the Supreme Court.;   "I have been honored to participate in this process,"
Thomas said before breaking into a broad grin and effusively gripping the
hands of his Judiciary Committee interrogators.  
  Front  
  SENATE QUESTIONING OF THOMAS ENDS
BUSH NOMINEE APPEARS HEADED FOR HIGH COURT  
     The committee will continue to hear testimony for and against Thomas at
least through the end of the week, but the outcome does not seem to be in
doubt. Several committee members said they expected the committee to
recommend, by a 10-4 or 9-5 vote, that the Senate confirm Thomas. Regardless
of the outcome, Thomas said on his way out of the hearing, "I have been
treated fairly.";   Before Thomas' testimony ended, the unflappable
43-year-old federal judge was criticized, sometimes in harsh terms, by several
liberal Democrats. They accused him of being evasive and of disavowing many
controversial statements he made while an official of the Reagan and Bush
administrations.;   Thomas repeatedly explained that he made the speeches as
an advocate for administration policy, acknowledging that they often contained
overheated rhetoric.;   Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said he found it
"difficult to accept the notion that the moment you put on a judge's robe all
the views and positions which you held prior to going on the bench just
magically disappear.";   "I want to look into the window of your soul,"
Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., said to Thomas. "but I find the shade down quite a
bit.";   Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., delivered a long, stinging lecture to
Thomas, declaring: "The vanishing views of Judge Thomas have become a major
issue in these hearings.";   Kennedy listed 10 instances in which he said
Thomas had abandoned or contradicted his previous positions.;   Kennedy told
Thomas he had "walked away" from his record on the right to privacy, refused
to comment on its application to abortion and asked lawmakers "to believe that
an intelligent and outspoken person like yourself has never discussed Roe vs.
Wade (the landmark 1973 abortion-rights ruling) with another human being.";  
Moderate Republican Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, who often casts a swing
vote on the committee, said he was not troubled by Thomas' shift toward more
moderate views at the hearings.;   "I believe he's going to be a surprising
justice. I don't think you can pigeonhole this man," Specter said.;   If
Thomas is confirmed as expected, he made it clear that, for the first time in
decades, there would be not one justice on the Supreme Court who is convinced
that capital punishment is unconstitutionally cruel.;   Justice Thurgood
Marshall, whom Thomas would replace, was the last member of the court who
opposed the death penalty in all cases. Thomas told the Judiciary Committee
that "philosophically, there is nothing that would bother me personally about
upholding it (the death penalty) in appropriate cases.";   After Thomas left
the hearing room, an American Bar Association evaluation committee told the
senators that his articles in law journals were deficient in presentation,
content, scholarship and analysis.;   But those limitations were outweighed by
his "brief but highly satisfactory performance on the Court of Appeals," the
committee said, noting that "we found only one opinion to criticize and many
to praise."  
  AARON EPSTEIN, Mercury News Washington Bureau  
  USA  
  Washington  
  Morning Final  
  SJ  
  San Jose Mercury News  
   910917  
  Tuesday  
  September  
  3A  
  1991  
  WEST  
  PHOTO  
  CA  
  571  
  Tuesday, September 17, 1991
00261053,SJ1  
  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  
  1  
  ENG  


 AP880428-0041 
AP-NR-04-28-88 0425EDT
r a PM-HeartAttack     04-28 0509
PM-Heart Attack,0523
Study: Three-Day Hospital Stays Enough for Some Heart Attack
Victims
By DANIEL Q. HANEY
AP Science Writer
BOSTON (AP) 

   New treatments that stop a heart attack in its
tracks may help victims to get out of the hospital more quickly
than ever before, perhaps even three days after their attacks, a
study published today concludes.
   Doctors from the University of Michigan Medical Center studied
the effects of sending a few carefully selected heart patients home
early. They found that these people had no unusual complications,
got back to work sooner and had substantially lower medical bills.
   ``It was an extraordinarily safe strategy,'' said Dr. Eric J.
Topol, the study's director. ``There were no problems with any
serious events.''
   Topol said the early discharges were made possible by two recent
medical advances _ tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA, and
angioplasty.
   When given quickly after a heart attack, TPA can dissolve clots
in the heart's arteries and minimize damage. Angioplasty can
produce similar results by opening up the clogged arteries with
tiny balloons.
   The report represents the latest in a steady three-decade trend
of sending heart attack patients home from the hospital after ever
shorter stays.
   However, the study in the New England Journal of Medicine said
more research is needed before the findings are widely adopted.
   In the 1950s, doctors often recommended that patients stay in
bed for one to two months after a heart attack. When President
Dwight D. Eisenhower suffered an uncomplicated heart attack in
1955, he spent seven weeks recovering in the hospital.
   However, doctors learned that long inactivity did more harm than
good. Patients got out of shape, developed blood clots and became
demoralized.
   In the 1960s, the stay was shortened to three weeks and in the
1970s to two weeks. Now, doctors typically keep heart attack
patients hospitalized seven to 10 days.
   In their paper, the doctors determined that 80 of the 507 heart
attack patients studied were healthy enough to be considered for
early discharge. None of them had irregular heart beats, chest pain
or heart failure. Treadmill tests showed no signs of heart attack
damage.
   Forty patients were sent home after three days, while the rest
stayed seven to 10 days. After six months of followup, none had
died, and the number of medical problems in both groups was similar.
   However, people in the early discharge group were able to return
to work about two weeks sooner than the others, and their medical
bills were significantly lower _ $12,546 versus $17,868.
   The researchers estimated that if 15 percent of all heart attack
patients were discharged after three days, the annual saving would
be at least $280 million.
   In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Gregory D. Curfman, a deputy
editor of the journal, cautioned that the study was not large
enough to spot complications that might result from reducing
hospital stays.
   ``This single study,'' he wrote, ``is not sufficient to justify
sweeping changes in current management practices for all patients
who may at first appear to have uncomplicated'' heart attacks.



 AP880818-0088 
AP-NR-08-18-88 0901EDT
r a PM-HeartDrug     08-18 0533
PM-Heart Drug,0548
Heart Attack Drug Not Always Helpful, Researcher Says
By RANDOLPH PICHT
Associated Press Writer
ROCHESTER, N.Y. (AP) 

   A drug used to treat patients complaining
of chest pain also could help prevent recurring heart attacks in
four out of five heart patients, according to a study published in
today's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.
   Surprisingly, however, the study found that the drug, diltiazem,
increases the chance of a subsequent heart attack in patients whose
hearts pump abnormally, experts said.
   Even so, the results may trigger an increase in the use of the
drug, which is now primarily used to treat angina, doctors said.
   The drug was tested in 38 hospitals in the United States and
Canada on patients who had recently suffered a heart attack, said
Dr. Arthur Moss, a clinical professor of medicine at the University
of Rochester and the principal investigator for the study.
   The results suggest the drug may be quite effective in
decreasing the likelihood of a second heart attack in the majority
of patients, Moss said. But the study also surprisingly suggests
that patients who suffer pulmonary congestion should not be given
diltiazem because the drug increases the chance of a subsequent
heart attack.
   ``We now know when to prescribe this drug and when not to,''
Moss said. ``That's what this study was all about.''
   Diltiazem is a calcium entry blocker, the newest class of drugs
to be introduced in the fight against heart disease. Nitrates and
beta blockers are the other types commonly prescribed by doctors.
   The study involved 2,466 heart attack patients, who were given
either 240 milligrams of diltiazem a day or a placebo. Patients
were recruited from 1983 to 1986 and followed for 12 to 52 months.
   Overall, the drug only decreased additional heart attacks 11
percent, which was not statistically significant, Moss said.
   But in patients who had normal or near-normal heart pump
function _ 1,909 patients or 80 percent of the total group _
diltiazem decreased the chance of another heart attack by 25
percent, Moss said.
   In patients whose hearts had pumping problems, the drug not only
didn't help, but it increased the chance of a heart attack by 25
percent.
   Dr. John Schroeder, a cardiologist and professor at Stanford
University, said he was surprised that the drug increased the
chance of heart attack in any group and that overall results were
not higher.
   ``But the bottom line is that this is the first study to show
that diltiazem can be effective,'' Schroeder said. ``I think it
will mean that more patients will be routinely put on this drug on
a long-term basis.''
   Dr. George Beller, a cardiologist and professor at the
University of Virginia, said he was also somewhat surprised about
the increase in heart attacks in the group suffering pulmonary
congestion.
   ``This is one of the first reports that seems to identify
that,'' he said.
   Diltiazem and two other calcium entry blockers were introduced
in the past decade, Beller said, and research into how effective
they are in various applications is in its early stages.
   Nitrates have been used for more than 50 years, and beta
blockers were developed in the 1960s.



 AP880829-0222 
AP-NR-08-29-88 0905EDT
a a BC-SPE--HealthCare:Heart     08-29 0843
BC-SPE--Health Care: Heart,0869
BC-SPECIAL EDITION
Health Care: Heart
LaserPhotos NY700, NY701
By PAUL RAEBURN
AP Science Editor
NEW YORK (AP) 

   Aspirin sales jumped 41 percent for a few weeks
earlier this year, not because of a rash of headaches.
   A study of more than 22,000 male doctors had shown that taking a
single aspirin every other day could cut heart attack risk in half.
   The study was one of a series of recent reports showing for the
first time that doctors are able not only to treat heart attacks _
but also to prevent them.
   In the most recent report, doctors found that one aspirin tablet
and a single dose of a clot-dissolving drug given within 24 hours
can dramatically cut the risk of a second fatal heart attack.
   Without the treatment, patients had a 13 percent chance of dying
from a second heart attack within five weeks, the researchers
found. With the treatment, the figure dropped to 8 percent.
   ``The real discovery is that treatment for patients is going to
reduce in-hospital mortality substantially,'' says Richard Peto of
Oxford University, one of the study's authors.
   Heart disease is the nation's leading cause of death, by far.
The National Center for Health Statistics reports that 762,820
Americans died of heart disease in 1987.
   To put it another way: Of the 2,127,000 American who died that
year, more than one in three died of heart disease. (This does not
include those who died of blood-vessel diseases, such as strokes.)
   The drugs most responsible for the recent success in preventing
heart attacks are the new clot-dissolvers and that old standby,
aspirin.
   The usual cause of heart attacks is a blockage of the coronary
arteries, which supply the heart muscle with oxygen-rich blood. The
blockage arises from the buildup of fats, cholesterol and clotted
blood.
   Clot-dissolvers break up clots, thus restoring blood flow.
Aspirin interferes with aspects of the clotting process, helping to
prevent clot formation in the first place.
   The limited sales of the clot-dissolving drugs in the United
States show that many doctors are still not using them, despite
their proven success. But that is beginning to change.
   Some doctors predict that in the not-too-distant future these
drugs will be judged so safe that they will be administered
routinely by paramedics in ambulances before suspected heart attack
victims even reach the hospital.
   ``We have to know how to respond quickly, and we have to have
the courage to use these drugs in the absence of definitive
diagnosis,'' says Dr. Burton Sobel of Washington University in St.
Louis, a pioneer in the testing of the clot-dissolvers.
   ``The most important thing we can do is teach patients in
advance about the value of early treatment,'' he says.
   While most public attention has focused on this new ability to
prevent heart attacks, researchers have also made important
progress in speeding the recovery of patients who survive heart
attacks.
   Researchers at the University of Michigan recently determined
that some heart attack victims can be released from the hospital as
soon as three days after their heart attacks. Most heart attacks
victims are kept in the hospital for at least seven to 10 days.
   The patients given early discharge were able to return to work
two weeks sooner than others in the study group. After six months,
not one death was recorded in the early-discharge group. The
researchers concluded that perhaps 15 percent of heart attacks
victims could be safely discharged after three days.
   In July, Stanford University doctors found that workers who went
back to their jobs about seven weeks after their heart attacks did
at least as well as workers who went back after a more typical
convalescence of about 10 or 11 weeks.
   All of these advances come at a time when public health experts
are increasingly emphasizing the role of good health and good
nutrition in lowering heart disease risk.
   Early next year, the American Heart Association seal of approval
will begin appearing on foods that are low in fat and cholesterol
and therefore can help reduce heart disease risk.
   U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop in July issued his first
report on nutrition, calling on Americans to lower their
consumption of fats and to eat more vegetables, fruits, fish,
poultry and whole grains.
   The report has been likened to the first Surgeon Generals report
on smoking, issued in 1964, which focused public attention on
smoking's hazards. Koop's recommendations largely echo those of the
American Heart Association, but they should help carry the message
to many more people.
   Progress in research on heart disease is making clear that the
heart attack is no longer a mysterious killer that strikes without
warning and cannot be defended against.
   Much can be done to prevent heart attacks, great improvements
are being made in treatments, and recovery is faster than ever
before.
   The use of a clot-dissolver and aspirin could, alone, save
25,000 lives a year in the United States, doctors say.
   ``These results,'' says Dr. Peter Sleight of Oxford University,
``will change medical practice worldwide.''



 AP881115-0113 
AP-NR-11-15-88 1338EST
u w AM-Heart-Balloon Bjt   11-15 0657
AM-Heart-Balloon, Bjt,640
Study Says Emergency Heart Procedure Unnecessary After Heart
Attacks
By DANIEL Q. HANEY
AP Science Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   The expensive practice of using balloon
catheters to force open heart arteries immediately after heart
attacks, now routinely done at many large hospitals, is unnecessary
and should be abandoned, according to a major study released Tuesday.
   The study found that if heart attack victims quickly receive
clot-dissolving drugs, they usually don't need the extra step of the
common balloon procedure, known as angioplasty.
   Some experts said the results are good news, because they mean
that most heart attack patients can be treated in community
hospitals, where angioplasty is not available.
   The study also has an important financial message. Its authors
estimated that if angioplasty was widely adopted after heart
attacks, it could raise the nation's annual medical bills by $704
million.
   ``This trial has settled one of the most important questions in
modern-day cardiology,'' commented Dr. J. Ward Kennedy of the
University of Washington, Seattle.
   The study is phase 2 of the Thrombolysis in Miocardial Infarction
Trial, or TIMI-II, directed by Dr. Eugene Braunwald of Brigham and
Women's Hospital in Boston.
   The first phase of the study showed that giving people a
clot-dissolving drug called tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA,
immediately after heart attacks dramatically improved their chances
of survival.
   The latest study, presented at the annual meeting of the American
Heart Association, was intended to see whether people did better
still if doctors tried to clear away any remaining blockages after
giving TPA.
   At 50 hospitals across the United States, doctors randomly
assigned 1,636 patients to get angioplasty within two days of their
heart attacks if tests showed there was any chance they might
benefit. Sixty percent of them actually underwent the procedure,
which temporarily inflates balloons in dangerously narrowed heart
arteries to squeeze them open.
   A comparison group of 1,626 also got TPA. But they were not
considered for angioplasty unless they had lingering heart pain or
abnormal exercise tests during their recovery.
   After 42 days, 11 percent of those in the angioplasty group had
died or suffered further heart attacks, as did 10 percent of those
in the comparison group.
   A year after the treatment, there was no difference in survival.
About 93 percent of both groups were still alive.
   ``There does not appear to be any additional benefit from
angioplasty,'' Braunwald said.
   Dr. Thomas J. Ryan of Boston University Medical Center commented,
``We have the answer in this trial to a very important question of
health care delivery.''
   While small hospitals can give clot-dissolving drugs to heart
attack patients, most of them do not have the sophisticated labs
where angioplasty is performed.
   If the study had found that immediate angioplasty improves
survival, it would have meant that many more angioplasty labs would
need to be established and more doctors trained to give the
procedure.
   ``The watch word is watchful waiting'' to see if patients need
angioplasty. ``This ultimately makes it possible for patients to be
treated in community hospitals and be transfered to terciary care
centers if angioplasty is needed,'' said Dr. Howard Morgan,
immediate past president of the heart association.
   Heart attacks occur when a clot blocks an artery that feeds the
heart muscle. The purpose of TPA and similar drugs is to dissolve
these clots before the muscle dies. To be effective, the drugs must
be given within about four hours of the start of heart attack
symptoms.
   Experts say that only about 20 percent of heart attack victims
are considered to be candidates for the drugs. Many people delay
going to the hospital until permanent damage occurs. In others, the
treatment may be considered too dangerous because of recent surgery
or a history of strokes.
   Balloon angioplasty is also widely used to treat people with
clogged heart arteries who have not suffered heart attacks. The
latest study did not question the usefulness of this kind of
angioplasty.



 AP890115-0014 
AP-NR-01-15-89 1239EST
r a AM-Heart Bjt   01-15 0652
AM-Heart, Bjt,0672
Heart Disease Death Rate Drops Dramatically But Still Biggest Killer
Eds: For release at 5 p.m. EST
By DANIEL Q. HANEY
AP Science Writer
MONTEREY, Calif. (AP) 

   Deaths from heart and blood vessel
disease dropped 24 percent over the past decade, but it remains by
far the nation's biggest killer, taking a life every 32 seconds, the
American Heart Association said Sunday.
   ``The good news is that we continue to see an improvement in the
death rate from the biggest killer of our population,'' said Dr.
Bernadine Healy of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, who is president
of the heart association.
   ``Those trends are dramatic and don't seem to be reversing,'' she
said. ``The bad news is that heart disease is still killing almost 1
million Americans a year, and we've got a long way to go.''
   The association released the statistics at its annual forum for
science writers.
   Experts attribute the decline in death rates to a combination of
healthier living habits, including fewer cigarettes and better food,
and improved medical treatment.
   ``The public ought to appreciate the progress that has been made
in heart disease over the past 20 years,'' said Dr. Myron L.
Weisfeldt of Johns Hopkins University. ``It's almost unbelievable.
There is almost no form of heart disease that we can't approach
without meaningful treatment.''
   However, Weisfeldt, who is president-elect of the heart
association, also cautioned that much work remains, both in
improving care and encouraging people to take better care of their
health.
   ``I believe we can prevent at least 50 percent of the ischemic
heart disease in the United States by the year 2000 if we stop
smoking, get cholesterol treated if it's above 220, and identify and
treat hypertension,'' he said.
   Ischemic heart disease is the clogging of blood vessels that feed
the heart. It underlies most heart attacks, the single most lethal
heart ailment.
   Association figures indicated that in 1986 _ the most recent year
for which there are statistics _ an estimated 978,500 Americans died
from heart attacks, strokes and other diseases of the heart and
blood vessels. Cancer, the No. 2 killer, took 466,000 lives.
   Between 1976 and 1986, the death rate from all forms of
cardiovascular disease fell 24 percent. It declined 28 percent for
heart attacks and 40 percent for strokes.
   The association's figures show that more than one in four
Americans suffers some form of cardiovascular disease, and almost
half of those eventually die from it.
   About 60 percent of the heart attack deaths occur before the
victim reaches the hospital. Studies show that about half of all
heart attack victims wait more than two hours before getting to an
emergency room.
   Weisfeldt said a major health goal is getting people to go to the
hospital within three or four hours of the first sign of heart
attacks. During this period, there is still time to give them drugs
to dissolve the blood clots that are causing their heart attacks.
This treatment can save lives and reduce the disability of heart
attacks.
   Other major goals, he said, include finding ways to improve the
effectiveness of angioplasty, a technique that uses balloons to open
clogged heart arteries, and finding surgical and medical techniques
to identify and protect people at risk of cardiac arrest.
   The heart association estimates that cardiovascular disease will
cost $88.2 billion this year in medical expenses and lost wages.
   Among other statistics released by the association:
   _The most common cardiovascular disease is high blood pressure,
which affects 60 million Americans.
   _About 200,000 of the deaths from cardiovascular disease each
year occur in people under age 65.
   _There were 1,418 heart transplants in 1987, almost nine times as
many as in 1983.
   _About 2.5 million Americans have angina, the chest pain
resulting from clogged heart arteries. About 300,000 new cases occur
annually.
   _As many as 1.5 million Americans will have heart attacks this
year.



 AP900322-0112 
AP-NR-03-22-90 1532EST
r a AM-HeartAttack 1stLd-Writethru a0636 03-22 0614
AM-Heart Attack, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0636,0623
Study Finds Drug Lowers Death Risk After Heart Attack
Eds: CORRECTS spelling to Verapimil sted verapimil in grafs 2, 5,
9, 10 and 11
By DANIEL Q. HANEY
AP Science Writer
NEW ORLEANS (AP) 

   A drug that eases the heart's workload can
cut the risk of new cardiac attacks and death by 20 percent in
people recovering from heart attacks, according to a major study
released Thursday.
   The study, conducted in Denmark, found that the drug Verapamil,
known as a calcium channel blocker, was effective for the 1{ years
after a heart attack. Calcium blockers are among several classes of
medicines commonly prescribed to relieve high blood pressure.
   ``This is the first trial that indicates that a calcium blocker
may be beneficial after an acute myocardial infarction,'' or heart
attack, said Dr. Carl J. Pepine of the University of Florida.
   Several other studies of calcium blockers, including one large
U.S. study published last year, failed to find any benefit from
using the medicines after heart attacks.
   According to the Danish study, Verapamil is about as effective
as another variety of blood pressure medicines known as beta
blockers at protecting people after heart attacks.
   While calcium blockers may not replace beta blockers after heart
attacks, the researchers said these drugs still should have a role
in treatment.
   ``We feel it is important to have alternatives. Many patients do
not tolerate beta blockers,'' said Dr. Kresten Mellemgaard of
Central County Hospital in Hillerod, Denmark, a co-author of the
study.
   Beta blockers are generally not recommended for people with
asthma and emphysema. This means the drugs often cannot be given to
cigarette smokers, who are frequent victims of heart attacks.
   In the study, conducted at 20 community hospitals, doctors
compared 897 patients who got Verapamil after heart attacks with
878 people who took placebos.
   After 18 months of followup, there were 146 deaths or recurring
heart attacks among the Verapamil patients, compared with 180 in
people who got the dummy medication.
   ``We wanted to see if an effect would be observed with
Verapamil,'' said Dr. Forgen Fischer Hansen of Copenhagen Municipal
Hospital.
   ``If it had an effect, it should be seen in the first 12 to 18
months, because there is a big increase in mortality in myocardial
infarction in this period,'' he said. ``Then it levels off. That's
what we demonstrated. It worked.''
   The researchers believe that by reducing the amount of work
needed by the heart to sustain circulation, calcium blockers
lowered the chances of ischemia, episodes in which the heart's own
muscle is deprived of oxygen.
   They said they were unsure why earlier studies failed to show
any benefit from calcium blockers after heart attacks. However,
they noted that some studies enrolled patients who were also taking
beta blockers. And this might have obscured any benefits from
calcium blockers.
   The results were presented at a meeting of the American College
of Cardiology. Among other research described at the meeting:
   _Dr. James H. Chesebro of the Mayo Clinic said a five-year study
found that aspirin does not stop the continued buildup of existing
blockages in the arteries feeding the heart, although it may
modestly protect against the development of new deposits. However,
like other studies, this one found that aspirin signficantly cut
the risk of heart attacks.
   _Dr. Eugene Braunwald of Harvard Medical School said the next
phase of a large study of clot-dissolving drugs will see what
effect they have in unstable angina. This is a condition in which
people suffer spontaneous chest pain that is not triggered by work
or stress. Until now, the drugs have been used only to treat heart
attacks.



 AP900705-0149 
AP-NR-07-05-90 2142EDT
r w AM-HeartSaver     07-05 0417
AM-Heart Saver,410
Growth Factor Protects Heart Following Attack, Study In Rats Shows
By PAUL RECER
AP Science Writer
WASHINGTON (AP) 

   A natural substance called transforming growth
factor beta appears to be able to limit damage to cardiac cells
following a heart attack, according to a study published in the
journal Science.
   In a study at the Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, a
group of laboratory rats induced to have heart attacks suffered 50
percent less cell damage after injections of transforming growth
factor beta than did rats that did not receive the TGF beta.
   ``TGF beta is a growth factor that opposes some of the bad guys
following a heart attack,'' said Dr. Allan M. Lefer, a professor at
Jefferson.
   Lefer said his research team simulated heart attacks in 24 rats
by partially blocking key arteries in their hearts.
   In 12 of the rats, the researchers injected a placebo. In the
other 12, they injected transforming growth factor beta.
   For those who received the TGF beta, said Lefer, ``the damage
from the attack was much less severe. There was about 50 percent
less injury with TGF beta than without it.''
   The extent of heart cell damage was determined by measuring the
amount of creatine kinase in the heart tissue following an attack.
Hearts damaged when the blood supply is interrupted, as in a heart
attack, tend to lose creatine kinase, said Lefer. Thus, by
measuring for the loss of this substance, researchers could
determine the amount of heart damage.
   Lefer said the TGF beta seems to block the action of other
substances, such as tumor necrosis factor, that can cause blood
vessels to narrow following a heart attack. Narrowed blood vessels
carry less oxygen-rich blood to cells and this causes additional
injury following a heart attack.
   TGF beta is normally present in heart cells, but the study
published in Science said that it is missing from rat heart cells
damaged by a simulated heart attack.
   Though TGF beta is produced naturally in the body, Lefer said
his research team used a substance produced artificially by
Genentech, a California biotechnology firm.
   Lefer said his team is now conducting additional studies with
TGF beta and that any experimental treatment of human heart attack
victims with the substance is at least a year away.
   Jefferson Medical College, where the study was done, is part of
Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.
   Science, which published the study, is the journal of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.



 AP901003-0006 
AP-NY-10-03-90 2350EDT
r a PM-Cholesterol     10-03 0408
PM-Cholesterol,0460
Study: Cholesterol-Lowering Surgery Saves Lives
By DANIEL Q. HANEY
AP Science Writer
BOSTON (AP) 

   An intestinal operation to lower the cholesterol
of heart attack patients reduced their risk for another heart
attack or death from heart disease, researchers said today.
   The surgery, called a partial ileal bypass, has one significant
drawback: It causes chronic diarrhea that persists for years.
   In the operation, doctors change the route of the small
intestine so about one-third of it is bypassed. This reduces the
amount of cholesterol that is absorbed into the bloodstream.
   The $52 million, 17-year study was conducted on people who had
already suffered heart attacks. The approach lengthened the lives
of people who had very mild heart attacks but not those with more
severe heart damage.
   During an average of 10 years of follow up, the death rate among
surgery patients who had sustained minimal heart damage was 24
percent. In a comparison group without the intestinal surgery, it
was 39 percent.
   Dr. Henry Buchwald of the University of Minnesota, who directed
the study, said the surgery should be considered along with
cholesterol-lowering drugs as a possible standard treatment.
   ``It has a role in the management of patients with high
cholesterol who have had a heart attack,'' Buchwald said. ``It is
eminently logical to extend all cholesterol-lowering therapy,
including this, to patients with high cholesterol who have not had
a heart attack.''
   Besides diarrhea, those who undergo the surgery are somewhat
more prone to have kidney stones, gallstones and intestinal
obstructions.
   The study was conducted in Minneapolis, Los Angeles,
Philadelphia and Little Rock, Ark., and published in today's New
England Journal of Medicine.
   Despite wide acceptance of cholesterol lowering, doubts remain
about whether it actually helps people live longer if they already
have healthy hearts. Although the latest study was conducted
exclusively on people who had suffered heart attacks, Buchwald said
he believes the research should settle that question.
   ``It offers the strongest justification for marked lipid
(cholesterol) ineervention that has ever been offered,'' Buchwald
said. ``It is a very powerful study and should, except for certain
people who will never be satisfied, end the cholesterol
controversy.''
   In the study, 421 people who recovered from heart attacks
underwent the surgery, while a comparison group of 417 people were
treated with diet alone. At the start of the study, their average
cholesterol levels were 251. The surgery lowered people's
cholesterol 23 percent.
   The overall risk of dying from heart disease or suffering
another non-fatal heart attack was reduced 35 percent among the
surgical patients with the healthiest hearts. The surgical patients
also required less than half as many coronary bypass operations
because of clogged heart arteries.



 WSJ880603-0129 
 FDA Urges Caution On the Use of Aspirin Against Heart Attack 
 
 PHA 
 FDA 
 CHICAGO (AP)  

   Doctors should be cautious in prescribing aspirin as a preventer of heart attacks until more research supports its value, the Food and Drug Administration said. 

   Taking aspirin to prevent heart attacks may increase some people's chances of dying of other things, especially hemorrhagic strokes, the agency said in a commentary in today's Journal of the American Medical Association. 

   The FDA persuaded aspirin makers in March to refrain from promoting aspirin as a preventer of first heart attacks, at least for now. 

   A study published in January indicated an aspirin every other day reduced the risk of nonfatal, first heart attacks 47% in 11,000 male doctors over five years, compared with 11,000 who took a non-aspirin substitute. 

   Aspirin tends to promote bleeding by reducing the ability of blood platelets to help form clots. 
Heart attacks usually occur when clots form in the arteries nourishing the heart and choke off its blood supply. 

   But aspirin may increase health risks for people who already have clotting problems, or for those who have high blood pressure, which puts them at increased risk for hemorrhagic strokes, the FDA commentary said. 

   Strokes are the result of brain damage caused by bleeding in the brain or by blood clots; hemorrhagic strokes are those caused by bleeding. 

   The FDA commentary pointed to 10 hemorrhagic strokes recorded among the 11,000 subjects taking aspirin in the recent study, compared with two such strokes among 11,000 subjects taking the substitute. 

   Overall death rates for the two groups were the same, though the aspirin group's nonfatal heart-attack rate was much lower. 
There were 104 nonfatal heart attacks among the aspirin users and 189 in the comparison group. 

   "Physicians, will, for a time, be forced to make their professional judgments about aspirin use on the basis of incomplete information," said the FDA commentary, co-written by agency Director Dr. Frank E. Young. 

   "We agree with them completely," said Dr. Julie Buring, a Harvard University researcher who participated in the aspirin study. 
She added in a telephone interview yesterday that an extension of the study is under way, and researchers expect to report to the FDA in late fall. 

   The commentary noted a British study, also released in January, of 5,000 male physicians that found that aspirin failed to protect against heart attacks, and that it was associated with a 2 1/2-fold increase in disabling strokes. 





WSJ910418-0105


910418-0105.


   Health:
   Test Identifies
   Patients at Risk
   Of Heart Attack
   ----
   By Jerry E. Bishop
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal


04/18/91


WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1


   BMY MRK


CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)


DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)


NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NEW YORK (NY)


   NEW YORK -- An experiment with more than 1,700 high blood
pressure patients showed that a blood and urine test can
pinpoint those patients most likely to have a heart attack.
   The experiment suggests that doctors could test their
patients with mild to moderate high blood pressure to
determine how intensively they should be treated to prevent
heart attacks, researchers said. The experiment indicated
that the test can spot those patients with extremely low risk
of heart attack as well as those with a high risk.


   The experiment also hinted that the blood and urine test,
which measures the activity of a blood protein called renin,
might suggest a new "risk factor" for heart attacks. About
half of the 1.5 million Americans who suffer a heart attack
each year don't have the known risk factors for heart
disease, such as high cholesterol levels, cigarette smoking,
obesity and high blood pressure. It is unknown what
distinguishes these seemingly healthy people from those who
don't suffer heart attacks.
   The blood and urine test is already being done in many
commercial laboratories but for medical conditions other than
heart attack risk, said John H. Laragh of the Cardiovascular
Center at Cornell University and New York Hospital. "In our
hands, it cost about $40 and in other labs it may cost the
patient $40 to $80," he said. Dr. Laragh pioneered the
research underlying use of the test, which was developed by
his wife, biochemist Jean E. Sealey. The test, which isn't
patented, is available in kit form to laboratories.
   The blood portion of the test determines whether the
kidneys are releasing renin into the blood stream and how
active the chemical is. The release of renin is the first
step in a rapid chemical chain reaction that raises blood
pressure. The urine portion of the test tells how much salt
is in the bloodstream. A high concentration of salt in the
blood also raises pressure.
   The test is based on the fact that if the salt
concentration in the blood rises, tending to boost blood
pressure, the activity of the renin normally drops to offset
the effect of the salt.
   The new experiment was designed to test a theory put forth
by Dr. Laragh and his colleagues that the activity of the
renin in the blood foretells a possible heart attack. The
theory has provoked sometimes furious controversy for almost
20 years.
   The Cornell cardiologist has argued that in many people
with high blood pressure the activity of the renin in the
blood is much higher than is warranted by the amount of salt
in the blood. Such "high renin" people are at a high risk of
a heart attack. On the other hand, in other patients with
high blood pressure, the activity of the renin is much lower
than is warranted by the degree of salt in the blood. These
"low renin" people are at a low risk of heart attack, Dr.
Laragh has maintained.
   In the experiment, blood and urine samples were obtained
at New York City offices and factories from 1,717 workers
found to have mild to moderate high blood pressure. The
patients' high blood pressure was initially discovered in a
screening program carried out by Michael H. Alderman and his
colleagues at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, who
operate a work-site blood pressure control program in
cooperation with local unions.
   In 1981, Dr. Laragh's group began testing the renin
activity in blood and urine samples collected by Dr.
Alderman's team. They kept track of the workers for more than
eight years to see which had heart attacks.
   The results, published in this week's New England Journal
of Medicine, lend strong support to Dr. Laragh's theory. Only
12% of the patients had high renin "profiles." But the seven
heart attacks in this small group constituted the highest
incidence of heart attacks among the patients, 13 heart
attacks per 1,000 person-years of observation.
   The incidence in the high renin patients was more than
double the incidence in those with a normal renin profile --
5.3 heart attacks per 1,000 person-years -- and more than
triple that of the patients with a low renin profile, 3.3 per
1,000 person-years, Drs. Alderman, Laragh and their
respective colleagues reported.
   Regardless of how the statisticians broke down the
patients into various groups, those with high renin profiles
almost invariably had the highest incidence of heart attacks.
Smokers had more heart attacks than nonsmokers, but the
incidence of attacks in smokers with high renin profiles was
more than six times that in smokers with low renin profiles.
   "But the real dynamite is in the patients who didn't have
any of the usual risk factors," Dr. Laragh said in an
interview.
   Among patients who had normal blood cholesterol level and
were free of diabetes, "those with high renin profiles were
seven times more likely to have a myocardial infarction
{heart attack} than those with normal or low renin profiles,"
the researchers wrote. There were no heart attacks among the
240 patients with low renin profiles who had no risk factors
other than high blood pressure.
   To Dr. Laragh, this suggests that a high renin profile
might signal a high risk of heart attack even for people
without high blood pressure. "We think everybody should have
this simple and accurate test," he said in the interview.
"It's a new window into heart disease."
   In an accompanying editorial, Victor J. Dzau of Stanford
University medical school said the study shows that the renin
profile test is "potentially useful" in identifying high
blood pressure patients who are at risk of a heart attack.
But, he wrote, "a larger, population-based study will be
important in confirming the results of this paper."
   The experiment has implications for drug makers as well as
patients. Apparently by coincidence, Abbott Laboratories
announced on Tuesday that is developing a high blood pressure
drug that works by inhibiting the activity of renin. Other
major drug makers are thought to also be working on renin
inhibitors. The experiment hints these drugs might also
protect patients from heart attacks.
   A big-selling class of high blood pressure drugs,
including Bristol-Myers Squibb Corp.'s Capoten and Merck &
Co.'s Vasotec, are known as ACE inhibitors because they work
by stopping renin in the blood from being converted to a
second chemical called angiotensin. Studies are under way to
see if these ACE inhibitors protect patients against heart
attacks as well as lower their blood pressure.



 AP891106-0072 
AP-NR-11-06-89 1050EST
r i PM-Britain-Politics     11-06 0624
PM-Britain-Politics,0643
Thatcher Says She'll Step Down After Next Election
By LESLIE SHEPHERD
Associated Press Writer
LONDON (AP) 

   Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has weakened her
position and kicked off the race to succeed her by saying she plans
to step down after winning another term, opposition leaders and
political observers said.
   A pro-Thatcher newspaper today said she had merely stated the
obvious and that her statements were no ``cause for astonishment.''
   Mrs. Thatcher told The Sunday Correspondent in an interview
published Sunday that she hoped to lead her Conservative Party to a
fourth successive election but said it was unlikely she would try
for a fifth.
   ``I think people would think it was time for someone else to
carry the torch,'' she told the newspaper.
   The Sunday Times of London said in a commentary: ``Mrs. Thatcher
has committed a colossal blunder.''
   ``She has given the riders for the Tory succession their
starting orders years in advance of the actual race,'' the
newspaper said.
   The next election must be held by the summer of 1992, but it is
expected Mrs. Thatcher will call it in 1991.
   Mrs. Thatcher, who turned 64 last month, has never previously
made it clear in public when she plans to retire as party leader.
She was elected in 1979, the first female prime minister in Europe,
and won re-election in 1983 and in 1987, when she said she planned
to ``go on and on.''
   Earlier this year, Mrs. Thatcher overtook Liberal Lord Asquith's
1908-1916 tenure as prime minister to become Britain's longest
continuously serving prime minister of the 20th century.
   Mrs. Thatcher's popularity is the lowest of any prime minister
since opinion polls began in Britain 50 years ago, and senior
colleagues have publicly admonished her to change her leadership
style following the surprise resignation of her treasury chief,
Nigel Lawson.
   Lord Callaghan, former Labor prime minister whom Mrs. Thatcher
defeated in 1979, said her comments had ``considerably weakened her
position.''
   If her party wins the next election, it is expected Mrs.
Thatcher would step down before her term ends to allow her
successor to choose a time to call a new election.
   ``My guess is that the Tory party will want someone as leader
who could take them through the next Parliament,'' Callaghan said.
   If Mrs. Thatcher resigns while in office, her successor elected
by the party automatically becomes prime minister with approval of
Queen Elizabeth II, but convention dictates that he or she seek a
mandate in a general election as soon as possible.
   The Sunday Times speculated she would step down by 1994. Mrs.
Thatcher would celebrate her 69th birthday that year and her
husband, Denis, will be 79 and ``his age may have been a factor in
her decision,'' the newspaper said.
   The newspaper predicted the opposition Labor Party will try to
promote leader Neil Kinnock as ``the occupant-in-waiting of 10
Downing St., who is ready, able and willing to complete a full
term.''
   Kinnock called Mrs. Thatcher's comments ``the interview of
someone preparing herself for quitting. Mentally, Margaret Thatcher
is preparing herself for packing her bags.''
   In an editorial today, the pro-Thatcher Daily Telegraph said
Mrs. Thatcher was merely stating the obvious by indicating she
would not seek a fifth term.
   ``Even were she not to fight a fifth election, Mrs. Thatcher
could yet enjoy seven more years in charge,'' it said.
   ``By then she would be in her 70s, and her devoted husband a
decade older ... Nonetheless, what other politician would be
expected to entertain an inquiry about his or her intentions in
seven years time? And can it really be a cause for astonishment
that Mrs. Thatcher is unwilling to commit herself to political
activity in her mid-70s and beyond?''



 AP901122-0100 
AP-NY-11-22-90 1650EST
u i AM-Thatcher-Reaction 1stLd-Writethru a0572 11-22 0800
AM-Thatcher-Reaction, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0572,0940
Foreign Leaders Pay Tribute To Mrs. Thatcher's Courage
Eds: LEADS with 22 grafs to UPDATE with praise from foes, comments
from South Africa, Japan, Soviet Union, other. Picks up 16th graf,
`Dutch Prime...'
With AM-Britain-Politics, Bjt
By AUDREY WOODS
Associated Press Writer
LONDON (AP) 

   Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's international
admirers praised her courage and achievements Thursday after she
announced she would resign. Even her foes tempered scorn with
praise for a formidable adversary.
   Said President Bush, ``I will miss her.''
   He called her ``an outstanding ally of the United States,''
adding, ``You always knew where she was and what she believed.''
   Vitaly Ignatenko, spokesman for Soviet President Mikhail
Gorbachev, told the independent Interfax news agency: ``Political,
economic and cultural ties between our countries have become of
greater importance'' in the Thatcher era. ``Our relations ... were
marked by constructivism and dialogue.''
   The reluctance Mrs. Thatcher showed toward increasing European
unity was the source of most criticism. But in a joyful and
unambiguous response, Iraq saw the Persian Gulf crisis as cause of
her downfall.
   Bitterness was undisguised in the comment from Argentina's
Nicanor Costa Mendez, foreign minister during his country's 1982
Falklands War with Britain.
   ``I can't say that it makes me sad,'' he said. ``I believe that
the extreme positions - unnecessarily extreme, unjustifiably
extreme - of the prime minister were one of the causes of the war,
and one of the biggest impediments to achieve agreement after.''
   Socialist President Mario Soares of Portugal singled out ``her
systematic opposition to the advances of the European Community.''
   ``During her long mandate,'' he said, ``the preoccupations of
social justice receded many times before purely development
objectives, causing a climate of discontent in British public
opinion to which Mrs. Thatcher appeared insensitive.''
   But Soares also lauded the British prime minister as a
``determined politician (who) took courageous positions on critical
occasions in international life and without doubt marked an era in
the contemporary history of her country.''
   German Finance Minister Theo Waigel noted, ``Despite her
critical position on some questions of European integration, she
accomplished a great deal for European politics.''
   A neutral letter from Socialist President Francois Mitterrand of
France told Mrs. Thatcher she had ``marked an important moment in
the history of your country and that of Europe.''
   Iraqi government spokesman Naji al-Hadithi said growing
opposition to her hard line against Iraq over its invasion of
Kuwait ``buried Mrs. Thatcher'' just as the 1956 crisis over
Britain's attack on the Suez Canal ruined former Prime Minister
Anthony Eden.
   Britain stepped in after Egypt nationalized the canal.
   On Thursday, Britain announced it was nearly doubling its troops
deployed in the gulf as part of the multinational force arrayed
against Iraq, sending 14,000 more soldiers to join the 16,000
already in the region.
   South African President F.W. de Klerk praised Mrs. Thatcher, who
opposed sanctions on South Africa, for standing up to world
pressure and standing by Pretoria.
   ``She had faith in South Africa's ability to solve its problems
in a democratic way ... She had the courage of her convictions,''
he said.
   Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel saidafter hearing of
her resignation that Israel ``feels a moment of sorrow because we
all know this special personality, Mrs. Thatcher, who did many
things and was an outstanding leader.''
   Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan said the British prime
minister ``is a rare leader of firm convictions who was invigorated
the United Kingdom and I feel great regret that she has withdrawn
from the front line.''
   Belgium's prime minister, Wilfried Martens, applauded ``the
determining role she played during more than 10 years in her own
country and on the international scene.''
   Said Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia, ``Even those like
myself who have been at odds with Margaret Thatcher on particular
issues have admired her courage and tenacity of purpose.
   ``Whatever the forces arrayed against her, she was always
prepared to pursue with the utmost vigor those positions in which
she believed.''
   Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers said, ``In the many years that
she placed such an important stamp on the policies of the United
Kingdom, Mrs. Thatcher has shown that she does not avoid making
difficult decisions that she deems to be in the nation's interest.
This, too, is such a decision which deserves respect.''
   Former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, now a
legislator in the European Parliament, said Mrs. Thatcher's
decision to quit was ``dignified and courageous.''
   ``Margaret Thatcher will be seen with Winston Churchill as the
greatest British prime minister of the last 50 years. The curtain
has fallen on the Iron Lady. She deserves our congratulations.''
   Even European Commission President Jacques Delors, Mrs.
Thatcher's archenemy in Europe, spoke of his ``high esteem'' for
her, despite their differences.
   Alfred Dregger, parliamentary leader of Germany's governing
Christian Democratic Union, said Mrs. Thatcher played a major role
in securing Western solidarity in the ``historical conflict for
freedom and democracy. We thank her for that.''
   Former President Reagan spoke with great warmth of his closest
foreign ally.
   ``Margaret Thatcher's resoluteness played a key role in ending
the Cold War,'' he said. ``She stood up to the Soviets and let them
know she meant business. Her deep and abiding dedication to the
principles of liberty and democracy served as an inspiration to
oppressed peoples everywhere who knew that Margaret Thatcher would
never waver in her belief that all men and women are entitled to
live in freedom.''



 AP901123-0002 
AP-NY-11-23-90 0009EST
r i PM-Britain-US     11-23 0605
PM-Britain-US,0748
With Thatcher's Demise, US Loses Its Staunchest Ally
Eds: Also in Friday AMs report.
An AP News Analysis
By TERENCE HUNT
AP White House Correspondent
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) 

   For almost a decade, Margaret Thatcher was
regarded at the White House as America's best friend, the trusted
ally whose strong views reinforced the conservative tone of
administration policies.
   Among Western allies, she was alone at Ronald Reagan's side in
1986 in supporting the U.S. bombing of Libya. In the Persian Gulf
crisis, she boldly joined with George Bush in sending troops to the
Middle East.
   ``You always know where she was and what she believed,'' Bush
said upon hearing of her decision to resign. ``She has always been
an outstanding ally of the United States,'' he said. ``I will miss
her.''
   There were many doubters around the world when Reagan arrived in
Washington with an economic program of free-market capitalism that
seemed out of step with the times. Mrs. Thatcher wasn't one of the
skeptics; she was advocating a similar program at home.
   They shared rocky relations with organized labor. Reagan
successfully fired the nation's air traffic controllers, dealing a
devastating blow to labor. She, too, smashed restive unions.
   On foreign policy, she frequently was more right wing than
Reagan - certainly more so than Bush.
   Reagan never made any secret of his special affection for the
British prime minister. They were ideological soulmates and called
each other Ronnie and Margaret. At international gatherings, they
usually were side by side.
   Two years ago as they met for the final time before Reagan left
office, the president said he was leaving the White House with
``considerable satisfaction in the knowledge that Margaret Thatcher
will still reside at No. 10 Downing Street.''
   She later wrote him a ``Dear Ron'' letter in which she praised
him as ``a great president, one of the greatest.''
   Like Reagan, she was deeply suspicious of the Soviet Union.
Together they advocated a hard line toward Moscow and championed
military readiness - even though she was the first to recognize
Mikhail S. Gorbachev as a leader she could do business with.
   Mrs. Thatcher encouraged the huge Pentagon buildup that Reagan
nurtured under the theme of peace through strength. She was a big
backer of U.S. efforts to install medium-range missiles in Europe
and always seemed cautious - perhaps reluctant - when it came to
disarmament.
   When Argentina and Britain clashed militarily over the Falkland
Islands, the United States was forced to make a painful choice
between two allies. Ronnie sided with Margaret.
   Washington's special relationship with London seemed to slip
when Reagan left power. Bush and Mrs. Thatcher disagreed publicly
last year over her government's decision to deport Vietnamese and
Cambodian ``boat people'' who were fleeing their countries to Hong
Kong.
   Bush, a veteran of world politics, knew many leaders around the
globe. Mrs. Thatcher suddenly seemed to be just one of the gang.
   The Berlin Wall was collapsing and it appeared as if Bush found
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl more interesting than Mrs. Thatcher.
She was merely one in a parade of foreign dignitaries who got the
prized invitation to visit Bush at Camp David this year.
   Nevertheless, Bush said he expected the ``special relationship''
between the United States and Great Britain to remain on a ``steady
keel.''
   Mrs. Thatcher did her part, demonstrating her loyalty. For
awhile she and Bush were seemingly alone in their suspicions of
Gorbachev's unilateral cutbacks in troops and arms in Europe, and
appeared uncertain how to respond.
   Under intense pressure from Congress, Bush began to warm to the
Soviet leader. Now they seem almost best of friends.
   On the Persian Gulf, Bush said he would not rule out possible
military force, and ordered a huge buildup of troops to make his
threat credible. Mrs. Thatcher, characteristically, was tougher.
   She said that unless Saddam Hussein got out of Kuwait soon, the
West would have to use military force to dislodge him.
   She called Saddam ``a loser,'' and the state-controlled Iraqi
news agency replied that she was an ``old hag.''
   Now, she is leaving. No one suspects that Britain's new
leadership - whoever it is - will take a soft line toward Iraq.
Yet, if the going gets tough, it might have been comforting for
Bush to be able to hear the tough old line from Thatcher.



 AP901123-0062 
AP-NY-11-23-90 1138EST
r a PM-Reagan-Thatcher 1stLd-Writethru a0442 11-23 0443
PM-Reagan-Thatcher, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0442,0515
Reagan Heaps Praise on Thatcher as She Heads Off Into Political
Sunset
Eds: Rewrites throughout to restore courtesy title on second
reference to Mrs. Thatcher. No pickup.
With PM-Britain Politics, Bjt
By ROSE ANA BERBEO
Associated Press Writer
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   Former President Reagan thanked British Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher for backing him up when other allies
backed down, heaping praise on his political soulmate as she heads
off into the sunset.
   ``Margaret Thatcher was a completely reliable ally and partner
of the greatest personal integrity,'' Reagan said in a statement
after Mrs. Thatcher announced her impending retirement.
   ``I could always count on her wise counsel, her firm support,
and her loyal friendship,'' Reagan said.
   Mrs. Thatcher on Thursday succumbed to the challenge mounted by
Michael Heseltine, who resigned as her defense minister in 1986.
   Reagan and the prime minister dubbed the Iron Lady formed a
formidable duo in the 1980s and made no secret of their mutual
regard. They often stood side-by-side at international gatherings
and called each other Ronnie and Margaret.
   Two years ago, as they met for the final time before Reagan left
office, the president said he was leaving the White House with
``considerable satisfaction in the knowledge that Margaret Thatcher
will still reside at No. 10 Downing Street.''
   Reagan, who spent Thanksgiving with friends at his Bel-Air home,
called her resignation in the face of strong opposition a
``selfless and courageous decision in what she believes is the best
interests of her country.''
   The former chief executive was always grateful to Mrs.
Thatcher's support of his conservative approach to foreign affairs
during his own eight-year tenure.
   In 1986, when the U.S. bombing of Libya was criticized by world
powers, Mrs. Thatcher was the only ally who supported Reagan and
allowed the bombers to fly from British bases.
   When Britain fought Argentina for the Falkland Islands, the
United States was forced to choose between two allies. Reagan sided
with Mrs. Thatcher.
   She also encouraged Reagan's nurturing of the huge Pentagon
buildup, and backed U.S. efforts to install medium-range missiles
in Europe, despite opposition from NATO allies.
   Both leaders adopted a hard line toward the Soviet Union, but
were quick to warm up to Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as
the Cold War thawed.
   Reagan credited Mrs. Thatcher's ``resoluteness'' for playing a
key role in ending the tensions between the Western democracies and
the Eastern Block.
   ``She stood up to the Soviets and let them know she meant
business,'' he said.
   Both were ardent advocates of the free market and private
enterprise.
   While the United States became mired in debt in the era of
Reaganomics, the British economy thrived on Mrs. Thatcher's radical
policies during her nearly 12-year rule. Average earnings were up
by nearly one-third and more Britons owned their homes during her
tenor.
   Like Reagan, however, Mrs. Thatcher was accused by liberals of
widening the gap between the rich and poor in her country, and both
clashed with organized labor.



 AP901126-0053 
AP-NY-11-26-90 1059EST
r i PM-Thatcher-Women 1stLd-Writethru a0421 11-26 0568
PM-Thatcher-Women, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0421,0687
British Women Say Thatcher Set Good Example But Little Else
Eds: SUBS penultimate graf to restore dropped first name and
reference to Ms. Hawkins.
By JESSICA BALDWIN
Associated Press Writer
LONDON (AP) 

   Margaret Thatcher set the example of what a woman
could achieve in British society, but her critics say she did
little else to help women along.
   For some, it was enough that her political career reached the
heights.
   One woman wrote to The Independent newspaper last week that her
7-year-old daughter wondered what title Mrs. Thatcher's successor
would hold, since ``he couldn't be called prime minister, that's a
girl's name.''
   Emma Nicholson, a Conservative Party lawmaker, said it was once
unthinkable that a woman would ever be a British prime minister.
``She has broken the mold once and forever,'' Ms. Nicholson said in
an interview.
   Mrs. Thatcher, who trained as a chemist before studying law,
said she viewed herself as prime minister, not as a woman. She
believed the battle for women's rights had been largely won and was
no believer in feminism.
   ``What has it ever done for me?'' she once asked.
   Mrs. Thatcher, who stepped down on Thursday, urged women to get
involved in politics, but did little to pull them up the ladder.
   Several female lawmakers were appointed to junior executive
posts in various ministries, but the only woman to serve in a
Thatcher Cabinet was Baroness Young, leader of the House of Lords
from 1981 to 1983.
   ``The truth is that although Mrs. Thatcher is a woman, she
doesn't believe in the advancement of women,'' Clare Short, a Labor
Party lawmaker, said last month.
   Edwina Currie, a former junior health minister, said any other
prime minister would have had several women in and out of the
Cabinet.
   ``It's Margaret's fault that the only people standing (to
succeed her) wear trousers,'' Mrs. Currie said last week. Trree men
are vying to succeed her as Conservative Party leader and thus
prime minister in a vote by party lawmakers set for Tuesday.
   Traditional male attitudes remain strong in Britain, from the
upper-crust, all-male clubs of London to the topless women pictured
daily in the tabloid press.
   Women are paid less than men and are poorly represented in
management jobs and in Parliament.
   However, campaigners for women rights say there are encouraging
signs at the grassroots.
   ``The critical mass of women have entered middle management in
government and business,'' said Lesley Abdela, a founding member of
the 300 Group.
   The group seeks equal representation for women in the 650-seat
House of Commons, which now has 43 female members.
   Women represented 43 percent of the British labor force in 1988,
compared with 40 percent in 1979 when Mrs. Thatcher became prime
minister. Britain has a higher proportion of working women than
other European Community countries.
   Though Mrs. Thatcher never made a priority of women's issues,
she did introduce some helpful legislation: tax concessions for
workplace nurseries; independent taxation for married women; and
legislation to compel absent fathers to pay child benefits.
   But as prime minister, she angered feminists by often
emphasizing women's traditional roles of homemakers and
care-givers.
   Angela Rumbold, the Conservative Party's minister for women's
issues, contends that an ``enormous amount'' has been done for
women during the Thatcher years.
   ``I'm not sure what she could have gone beyond promoting people
who were there just because they were women,'' she said in an
interview. ``Margaret Thatcher is a great meritocrat. She believes
in getting people to succeed on their merits.''
   Jo Hawkins of the 300 Group, which is seeking equal numbers of
women in the House of Commons, believes Mrs. Thatcher's
extraordinary abilities made it difficult for her to understand the
needs of the average woman.
   ``She would say that anybody can do it, just stick to your
principles and get up and do it,'' Ms. Hawkins said. ``I think
because of her character, her personality and her amazing
self-confidence, she isn't aware of how the normal person
struggles.''



 LA040689-0198 
 40693 


April 6, 1989, Thursday, P.M. Final 




Part A; Page 2; Column 3; Late Final Desk 




310 words 




GORBACHEV, THATCHER TALK 4 HOURS; 


SESSION COVERS WIDE RANGE OF SUBJECTS; THEY 'LOVE TO ARGUE' 




From Associated Press 




LONDON 




Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 
today argued passionately during a four-hour meeting that covered subjects 
ranging from disarmament to reports of Soviet bomber sales to Libya, officials 
said. 


Reopening a European peace offensive that was disrupted by the Armenian 
earthquake, Gorbachev had "extremely frank exchanges, animated, warm, 
passionate and solemn," said a Thatcher spokesman, requesting anonymity. 


Gorbachev also hit the streets of London, stopping his motorcade to shake hands 
with about 20 people in a crowd of several hundred who cheered him outside 
Westminster Abbey. 


The Thatcher spokesman said the Soviet leader and the staunchly anti-Communist 
prime minister "love arguing." 


Emerging from her 10 Downing St. residence into the icy rain with Gorbachev at 
her side, Thatcher told reporters: 


"The talks have been very deep, very wide ranging and very friendly, and as 
always we got to grips with the real issues." 


The spokesman said Thatcher asked Gorbachev about a report from Washington that 
Moscow sold up to 15 long-range fighter-bombers to Libya, which Britain accuses 
of sponsoring terrorism. Gorbachev did not respond, he said. 


Although the two leaders could make no progress on the bomber issue, the 
spokesman said the Soviet and British foreign ministers, meeting separately, 
would most likely discuss the matter at length. 


He said Thatcher also accused the Soviets of having been "not as frank as they 
should be" about their chemical weapons arsenal. 


He quoted Gorbachev as replying: "If you aren't fully satisfied, then quite 
clearly we have to have more exchanges. We have got to try better to convince 
each other." 


Another area of disagreement was Gorbachev's goal of eliminating all nuclear 
weapons from Europe. Thatcher believes the deterrence of nuclear weapons 
prevents war. 




Photo, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev checks his watch as Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher speaks. Associated Press 




Wire 




 LA112090-0165 
 311032 


November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Home Edition 




World Report; Part H; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk 




1094 words 




THE PRESS; 


TORIES' TORMENT: WHAT TO DO WITH THATCHER? 




Flamboyant former Defense Minister Michael Heseltine's challenge to Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher for leadership of the Conservative Party has caused 
a political sensation in Britain. A crucial first vote of Tory Members of 
Parliament (MPs) is scheduled for today, and if Heseltine should wrest control 
of the party from Thatcher -- the longest-serving British head of government in 
modern times -- she would also have to give up the prime minister's job that 
she has held since 1979. 


 Here's a sampling of editorial comment on the contest that has stirred 
Britain: 


 "The Thatcher era in British politics is almost over. . . . It is more likely 
than not that she is finished altogether. The coup de grace may not be 
delivered at this moment. The nature of the era that comes afterward is far 
from clear. But as a political force, she is condemned at best to an 
unrelenting rear-guard action which will end sometime in a humiliating abyss. . 
. . 


"The party may sullenly support her now, but they will ask the question again 
in the spring, knowing that if they do not do so the country will ask the same 
question even more pitilessly when the general election comes. . . . 


"An alternative, however, stares her in the face. . . . It is to acknowledge 
that an era has passed, and preserve its achievements by standing down, 
releasing her lieutenants and urging her party, in the interests of a vanished 
unity, to support Mr. (Foreign Minister Douglas) Hurd." 


 -- Thatcher biographer Hugo Young in The Guardian 


"The contest for the leadership of the Conservative party . . . should not be 
occurring. . . . 


"It would be foolish to deny that, today, the prime minister is politically 
beleaguered as never before. . . . But the task of the Conservative party, in 
the year and more that remains before the next general election, must be to 
rally to enable Mrs. Thatcher to rebuild her personal position, and give her 
the confidence and support to win the fourth term she deserves." 


 -- The Daily Telegraph 


"Who could have guessed . . . from watching the prime minister answer questions 
in the Commons that she was fighting for her life? She was as brisk and 
well-briefed as ever. . . . 


"Bloodied Margaret Thatcher may be. Bowed she most certainly is not." 


 -- Daily Mail 


"British Conservative MPs must be prepared to reject Mrs. Thatcher when they 
vote in the party's leadership election. . . . It is no longer in the interests 
of the United Kingdom, which are now inextricably linked with the development 
of a strong and united Europe, for her to remain in office. 


"The European derives no satisfaction from reaching this conclusion. Apart from 
her domestic achievements in reviving the British economy in the 1980s, Mrs. 
Thatcher has contributed much more to the development of the European Community 
than she is often given credit for. . . . 


"But The European believes that her nightmare vision of Europe, of 
ill-intentioned people trying to destroy democracy, is not shared by most of 
the British people. They reject her view that pooling of sovereignty is no 
different from surrender. . . . 


 "The Conservative Party faces a stark choice. Either it will reelect Mrs. 
Thatcher and see the United Kingdom slip into isolation as it is left behind 
the rest of the Community. Or it can choose a new leader who is prepared to 
participate genuinely in the argument about economic and political union." 


 -- The European 




 "A prime minister in total command for 11 years could not be unseated, and 
cherished policies abandoned, without an explosion within the party. It would 
take a Solomon to heal the divisions and prevent civil war. Frankly, we cannot 
see Mr. Heseltine in that role. 


"The Sun also deeply questions his ability to be a successful or even adequate 
prime minister. . . . This is the man who for the past five years has professed 
loyalty to the government and yet has been its most divisive force. We discern 
just one constant loyalty -- and that is to Michael Heseltine." 


 -- The Sun 


"Mrs. Thatcher deserves better than to be dismissed in the shoddy and demeaning 
manner some Tory MPs are minded to have in store for her. To be defeated by the 
people in a general election, as was Winston Churchill in 1945, that was an 
honorable rejection. To be brought down by a vote of censure in the House of 
Commons, as was Neville Chamberlain in 1940 -- even that was a constitutionally 
respectable form of political demise. But what they are proposing to do to Mrs. 
Thatcher, unquestionably the greatest peacetime prime minister of this century, 
is quite simply unworthy. Her fate could be sealed, if her opponents have their 
way, behind closed doors in smoke-filled rooms. . . . Persons of quality were 
always accorded the dignity of execution by ax or firing squad, rather than the 
humiliation of hanging. These plotters would like to dispatch Mrs. Thatcher, 
who almost single-handedly has won three elections, by the political equivalent 
of the rope. . . . 


"You can find Heseltines wherever you go. But there is only one Mrs. Thatcher. 
Handle with care. This valuable object is irreplaceable." 


 -- The Sunday Telegraph 


"This newspaper has long maintained that the best result in the next general 
election would be for Margaret Thatcher to lead the Tories to a fourth victory. 
Sadly, the course of events has conspired to make that unlikely. . . . 


"The British have never liked Margaret Thatcher; but as long as she delivered 
the goods they respected her, and voted for her. When her government fails (as 
it has recently), that lack of affection turns to growing resentment. For 
reasons that are probably unfair and undeserved, Mrs. Thatcher is now a victim 
of that strongest public mood of all: time for a change. . . . 


"Mrs. Thatcher is right to feel bitter that a prime minister with her track 
record and prestige can be so easily challenged. If she goes, the manner of her 
ousting will leave much to be desired; no other party could so lightly dispose 
of its leader in government, this side of an election, largely for reasons of 
unpopularity. But the Tories have a nose for survival in power unmatched by any 
other party in the democratic world, and politics is an unforgiving business. 
The issue before Tory MPs . . . is not the reelection of Margaret Thatcher, it 
is the defeat of (opposition Labor Party leader) Neil Kinnock. That requires 
saying a reluctant goodby to Mrs. Thatcher, and the endorsement of Michael 
Heseltine." 


 -- The Sunday Times 




NEWSPAPERS -- ENGLAND; ENGLAND -- POLITICS; THATCHER, MARGARET; HESELTINE, 
MICHAEL; CONSERVATIVE PARTY (ENGLAND); LEADERSHIP 




 LA112190-0001 
 311051 


November 21, 1990, Wednesday, Home Edition 




Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 3; Editorial Writers Desk 




339 words 




THERE'LL ALWAYS BE AN ENGLAND; 


BUT MARGARET THATCHER WON'T ALWAYS BE PRIME MINISTER 




Embattled Margaret Thatcher remains leader of Britain's Conservative Party, and 
so the country's prime minister -- but only barely. She has survived a vote of 
confidence taken by her party colleagues in the House of Commons, winning 204 
votes against 152 for former defense minister Michael Heseltine. But under Tory 
party rules, that margin, representing something less than a ringing 
endorsement, forces Thatcher to face a second round of voting on Tuesday. Other 
candidates could choose to stand against her, perhaps diluting the opposition 
vote and letting her claim the simple majority she needs to stay as party head. 
But her reelection is hardly assured. 


Polls show the Tories would do better in the next national elections with 
someone other than Thatcher leading them. But elections don't have to be called 
until mid-1992; Thatcher's public standing could conceivably increase by then. 
Thatcher has served as PM longer than anyone in this century. She led her party 
to victory in three elections, steered it through the war with Argentina to 
reclaim the Falklands, faced down the miners union in a long strike, moved -- 
often drastically -- to reverse Britain's economic decline and won a prominent 
place on the world stage. 


But 11 1/2 years in office is a long time. Memory and feelings being what they 
are, it is the mistakes and irritations of this long tenure that are more 
likely to be immediately recalled, while its achievements are left to history 
to salute. Thatcher is seen as having become increasingly autocratic at home 
and a somewhat tiresome scold within the European Community. Her government is 
deeply identified with high interest rates, inflation and a flat tax on every 
adult (in place of the property tax) that is generally regarded as hugely 
unfair. Ultimately, in the cold calculus of politics, the question that will 
most decisively sway Conservative MPs is whether they are more likely to win 
the next election with Thatcher at their head or someone else. Next week will 
bring the answer. 




Editorial 




 LA112390-0008 
 312054 


November 23, 1990, Friday, Home Edition 




Metro; Part B; Page 5; Column 4; Op-Ed Desk 




857 words 




THE ROMANCE IS OVER; THE ANGLO PARTNERSHIP PALES; 


THATCHER: SHE WAS A SYMBIOTIC ALLY TO REAGAN AND THEN BUSH; SHE SIMPLY LOST HER 
OWN PARTY'S ALLEGIANCE. 




By PETER STOTHARD, Peter Stothard is the U.S. editor, based in Washington, of 
the Times of London. 




President Bush lost an irreplaceable pin supporting his mission in the Persian 
Gulf on Thanksgiving Day. He heard the news of Margaret Thatcher's resignation 
as he celebrated the holiday in the Saudi desert -- and it clearly came as a 
shock. In the State Department, too, it came as a shock. Americans who had come 
to take Thatcher for granted during her 11 years of power were not prepared for 
her passing. 


Thatcher had told the world that she would fight to a second ballot after her 
narrow failure to retain the premiership outright on Tuesday. The feeling 
everywhere was that Thatcher always stuck to her word. So no problem. Pass the 
turkey. 


Thatcher's friends all over the world had reckoned without the British 
Conservative Party, which had looked at the opinion polls, the bad economic 
news and an unpopular new tax and smelled a loss at the next election. They had 
reckoned without the hatred for the flamboyant Michael Heseltine among the 
middle-ranking party figures who risked losing their jobs and future prospects 
if the unpredictable "Tarzan" came to power. 


It was an extraordinary scene in the palace of Westminster on Wednesday night 
as one by one her own Cabinet members trooped sheepishly into Thatcher's office 
and told her, in their chosen code, that they "couldn't support her over the 
weekend" in the second round of secret balloting on the party's leadership. 
Therefore, if Heseltine was to be beaten, it had to be by someone else. After 
"sleeping on it," as one of her closest advisers put it, Thatcher reluctantly 
concluded that she had to go. Thus did the toughest fighter for shared British 
and American values since Winston Churchill become the first prime minister to 
be forced out of office by the Conservative Party since the failed war leader 
Neville Chamberlain. 


When George Bush recovered from his Thanksgiving surprise, he was generous in 
his praise. Two years ago, his words would have rung hollow. The President 
began his term in office without much trust in her. He had seen the influence 
she exerted over Ronald Reagan and was keen to be seen as his own man. He had 
heard her doubts over the pace of German reunification and the integration of 
Europe, and had been persuaded by his advisers that she stood against the 
United States' best interests. 


Gradually, however, that changed. At the beginning of the Persian Gulf crisis, 
the President deliberately sought Thatcher's analysis. It was her assessment of 
the threat to international security posed by Iraqi aggression that, according 
to British and American sources, set the moral framework for Operation Desert 
Shield. The pivotal moment was when she fielded press questions about Iraq on 
Bush's behalf in the Colorado mountain garden of the U.S. ambassador to 
Britain, Henry Catto; that marked the public turning point. She was able to 
articulate what Bush sensed was right. And he was able to defer to her without 
embarrassment, seeming almost gentlemanly in allowing her to go first. 


Bush is unlikely to reach such a rapport with any of her three potential 
successors. Heseltine is an exceptionally powerful orator, but it hard to see 
that helping the tongue-tied American President. Douglas Hurd, the urbane 
foreign secretary, is an English James Baker; the President already has a James 
Baker. John Major, the chancellor of the Exchequer and Thatcher's own choice to 
succeed her, may have views very close to Bush's. But he is mild-mannered, 
slightly clumsy and, although widely liked and admired by his friends, is 
almost wholly without international experience. 


The issue is no longer the Anglo-American "special relationship." It is 
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan who will go down in history as Washington 
and London's "last romantics." They were the ones who would each ditch their 
closest friends in order to support the other: Reagan when overruling Jeane 
Kirkpatrick's objections to the Falklands campaign, and Thatcher when blocking 
her own right wing's protests at the U.S. bombing of Libya from British bases. 
They shared the conviction that communism could be rolled back -- and she 
helped persuade him that Mikhail Gorbachev was a man who could be trusted. The 
powerful enunciation of that belief -- and its eventual vindication -- may be 
the last great achievement of the special postwar Anglo-American alliance. 


George Bush and Margaret Thatcher had something more simple in common, a 
pragmatic relationship of mutual respect and support that benefited both. 


British policy toward Iraq will not change suddenly under a new prime minister. 
The doubling of the size of the British gulf force on Thursday attempted 
emphatically to prove that. But as time goes by, Britain's allies will find 
that many certainties have passed along with Margaret Thatcher. If seductive 
deals emerge to save the face and the atomic-weapon factories of Saddam 
Hussein, her steadfastness will be sorely missed. 


And if Europe becomes more inward-looking and protectionist, blame those who 
booted out the prime minister whose final words to her Cabinet were, "It's a 
funny old world." Her memoirs deserve a more dignified title. 




Opinion 




 LA120890-0055 
 319341 


December 8, 1990, Saturday, Home Edition 




Part A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk 




434 words 




IT'S NOW 'LADY THATCHER,' BUT SHE'LL STICK WITH 'MRS.' 




By WILLIAM TUOHY, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




LONDON 




Queen Elizabeth II awarded former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher the coveted 
Order of Merit on Friday and made her husband a baronet, which is a hereditary 
knighthood. 


From now on Denis Thatcher will be formally addressed as Sir Denis and his wife 
as Lady Thatcher, although she insisted Friday she wished to be known simply as 
"Mrs. Thatcher." 


"I have done pretty well out of being Mrs. Thatcher," said the former prime 
minister, who resigned Nov. 22 during a fight for the leadership of the 
Conservative Party. 


Palace insiders said Friday that one reason for the quick award of the Order of 
Merit, restricted to only 24 eminent men and women, was the queen's desire to 
demonstrate that there is no animosity between Britain's two most prominent 
women. 


In the past, Buckingham Palace sources and journalists assigned to the royal 
court have said that the two did not get along. 


"This puts (to rest) rumors that the queen and Mrs. Thatcher didn't like each 
other," said Harold Brooks-Baker, director of Burke's Peerage and an authority 
on the royal family. 


As a member of the Order of Merit, created in 1902, Thatcher joins such 
luminaries in the world of arts, science and politics as philosopher Isiah 
Berlin, historian Veronica Wedgwood, writer Graham Greene, violinist Yehudi 
Menuhin and artist Sidney Noland, as well as honorary member Mother Teresa. 


Deceased recipients include Prime Minister Winston Churchill, Gen. Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, missionary Albert Schweitzer and actor Lawrence Olivier. 


Contrary to some reports, the OM, as it is popularly called, does not precede 
all other British royal honors but ranks behind the Order of the Garter, which 
dates from 1348. 


Thatcher said she was "deeply honored and moved" by the award. 


At the same time, the queen gave a baronetcy to Thatcher's husband Denis, the 
subject of fictional letters from No. 10 Downing Street invented by the 
satirical magazine Private Eye about life as the prime minister's consort. 


Baronets date from 1611. Sir Denis' title passes upon his death to his son, 
Mark, who is married to an American, and will eventually pass to Mark 
Thatcher's son, Michael. 


With an OM, Thatcher can continue to serve in the House of Commons as the 
member from the North London constituency of Finchley. 


Burke's Brooks-Baker believes that Thatcher eventually should be made a 
hereditary countess, which in Britain is the female equivalent of an earl. 
Traditionally, retiring prime ministers of Britain were granted earldoms, 
although Churchill, for one, refused a peerage, preferring to remain in the 
House of Commons. 




THATCHER, MARGARET; THATCHER, DENIS; HONORS; ENGLAND -- POLITICS 




 AP891017-0195 
AP-NR-10-17-89 2050EDT
u a AM-SFQuake 3rdLd-Writethru a0805 10-17 0340
AM-SF Quake, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0805,0344
URGENT
Eds: UPDATES throughout with magnitude, other details. No pickup.
Earthquake Rocks San Francisco
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) 

   A major earthquake rocked northern
California Tuesday evening, collapsing part of the San Francisco
Bay Bridge and shaking Candlestick Park and buildings up to 95
miles away.
   Some buildings may have collapsed, said Police Officer D.
Collins. There were reports of injuries at Candlestick, where fans
were waiting for the World Series to begin, and the stadium was
evacuated, ABC-TV and Cable News Network reported.
   The quake, which lasted about 15 seconds, measured 6.5 on the
Richter scale, according to seismologists at the California
Institute of Technology in Pasadena. The preliminary reading was
from the Alaska Tsunami warning system, Caltech said.
   Televised footage of the bridge showed that a 30-foot section of
the span's upper deck had collapsed onto the bottom level.
   Fans at Candlestick screamed as the stadium swayed for about 15
seconds. Players from the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland
Athletics were on the field and stood around as fans began to leave
their seats.
   Buildings in San Francisco swayed several feet.
   The quake shook buildings in Sacramento, 95 miles to the
northeast, and was felt as far away as Reno, Nev., 225 miles to the
east.
   The quake knocked out phones and power, including electricity at
The Associated Press' bureau in San Francisco.
   The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on
seismographs. Every increase of one number means a tenfold increase
in magnitude. Thus a reading of 7.5 reflects an earthquake 10 times
stronger than one of 6.5.
   An earthquake of 3.5 on the Richter scale can cause slight
damage in the local area, 4 moderate damage, 5 considerable damage,
6 severe damage. A 7 reading is a ``major'' earthquake, capable of
widespread heavy damage; 8 is a ``great'' quake, capable of
tremendous damage.
   The San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which occurred before the
Richter scale was devised, has been estimated at 8.3 on the Richter
scale.



 AP891017-0199 
AP-NR-10-17-89 2158EDT
u a AM-SFQuake 6thLd-Writethru a0817 10-17 0875
AM-SF Quake, 6th Ld - Writethru, a0817,0894
URGENT
Eds: CBS says one dead, major damage. new quotes.
Earthquake Rocks San Francisco
Laserphoto NY56, Others Upcoming
By RICH CARTIERE
Associated Press Writer
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) 

   A violent earthquake rocked Northern
California during Tuesday evening's rush hour, caving in a section
of the San Francisco Bay Bridge, terrifying World Series fans in
Candlestick Park and shaking buildings as far as 200 miles away.
   CBS-TV reported one person had been killed on the bridge. There
were no other immediate confirmed reports of deaths or injuries,
but ABC-TV and CNN both said some people were injured at
Candlestick, where the game was canceled and fans were evacuated.
   It was not immediately clear how extensive the damage was from
the quake, which struck at 5:04 p.m. PDT and registered 6.9 on the
Richter scale. It was centered near Hollister, 80 miles southeast
of San Francisco in San Benito County.
   ``The thing struck just as everyone was going home,'' said Tom
Mullins, a spokesman for the California Office of Emergency
Services in Sacramento. ``We've got reports coming in from San
Benito and Santa Clara counties of heavy damage.''
   CBS said the California Highway Patrol reported a J.C. Penney
building in downtown Hollister collapsed and a bridge on Highway
101 in Hollister collapsed.
   There were unconfirmed reports that a shopping mall collapsed in
San Jose, 50 miles south of San Francisco.
   San Francisco Airport was evacuated, and some people there were
hit with falling plaster.
   One major fire was blazing in San Francisco's Marina District
and another near the library at University of California at
Berkeley. A huge plume of smoke visible for miles over Berkeley.
   Hundreds of people fled Bay Area Rapid Transit subway and
elevated stations in San Francisco and East Bay suburbs. The system
was shut down.
   Televised footage of the bridge connecting Oakland and San
Francisco showed that a 30-foot section of the upper deck had
collapsed, leaving two cars dangling between the two levels.
Reports said most occupants got out of their cars safely.
   In Washington, President Bush said the federal government was
prepared to send help to the earthquake area in California and he
was sending Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner there to assess
the damage.
   At City Hall in San Francisco a radio reporter told listeners,
``The entire building started to shake ... you could hear people
yelling and screaming all over the building.''
   She said there were ``obvious problems'' at the health
department across the street. ``Water was literally gushing out of
the building from a window on the second floor,'' the unidentified
reporter said.
   Citizens of Marin, north of San Francisco, were warned to shut
off their gas because the smell of gas was all over town.
   Frank Baldwin of U.S. Geological Survey's Earthquake Center said
the quake's magnitude was 6.9 on the Richter scale. It occurred at
5:04 p.m. PDT and was centered in the Santa Cruz, Calif., area, 75
miles south of San Francico on the Pacific Coast.
   The quake was felt as far away as Reno, Nev., 225 miles to the
northeast.
   The quake knocked out phones and power, including electricity at
The Associated Press bureau in San Francisco.
   The San Mateo bridge, which crosses the bay about 10 miles south
of Candlestick Park was closed for inspection.
   San Francisco Police Officer Dwayne Collins said there were
reports that buildings and statues in the historic South of Market
district near downtown had collapsed.
   ``I thought I was losing my balance, then I saw the lamppost
sway one foot each direction. Then I saw falling glass, broken
glass on the street, but luckily not near me, `` said Les Galvacs
who was walking down Market Street in downtown San Francisco.
   David Balague, 22, was on the 14th floor of the Bank of America
building. ``I've never been so scared. People were fighting to get
under the desks.''
   Fans at Candlestick screamed as the stadium swayed shortly
before the San Francisco Giants and Oakland Athletics were to have
begun the third game of the World Series.
   ``This upper deck was absolutely shaking, the light stanchions
were blowing back and forth, phones have gone out,'' Suzyn Waldman,
a reporter covering the World Series for WFAN-AM in New York told
listeners shortly after the quake hit. ``Everyone is standing
around here, people in the upper deck absolutely terrified to move
not knowing what to do.''
   A man in Saratoga, southwest of San Jose, told a San Francisco
radio station, ``My house is OK, but everything in it is gone. My
refrigerator is standing in the middle of the kitchen.'' He said
10,000 gallons of water from his swimming pool crashed through his
picture window into his home.
   The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on
seismographs. Every increase of one number means a tenfold increase
in magnitude. Thus a reading of 7.5 reflects an earthquake 10 times
stronger than one of 6.5.
   An earthquake of 6 on the scale can cause severe damage. A 7
reading is a ``major'' earthquake, capable of widespread heavy
damage. The San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which occurred before
the Richter scale was devised, has been estimated at 8.3 on the
Richter scale.



 AP891017-0204 
AP-NR-10-17-89 2325EDT
r a AM-Quake-Odds     10-17 0456
AM-Quake-Odds,0468
Area Where Earthquake Hit Seen as Highly Probable in 1988 Report
With AM-SF Quake
By MICHAEL FLEEMAN
Associated Press Writer
PASADENA, Calif. (AP) 

   The major earthquake that struck the San
Francisco Bay area Tuesday occurred in a region seismologists
targeted as having the highest probability of a strong quake in
Northern California.
   A 1988 report by the U.S. Geological Survey placed the
probability of an earthquake of 6.5 magnitude on the Richter scale
at 30 percent by the year 2018 in the Southern Santa Cruz mountains.
   The high probability is based on several factors, including
length of time since the last major earthquake struck the area in
1906, said Clarence Allen, professor of Geology and Geophysics at
the California Institue of Technology in Pasadena.
   ``This is not to say we predicted the earthquake. It just has to
do with the probability of an earthquake in this area,'' Allen said.
   He noted that the 1988 report, titled ``Probabilities of Large
Earthquakes Occurring in California on the San Andreas Fault,''
presented information that was already widely known among
scientists. Allen said this information should have alerted
officials to take preventive steps.
   Frank Baldwin of U.S. Geological Survey's Earthquake Center said
the quake's magnitude was 6.9 on the Richter scale. It was centered
in the Santa Cruz, Calif., area, 75 miles south of San Francico.
   The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on
seismographs. A reading of 6 can cause severe damage. A quake of 7
magnitude, a ``major'' earthquake, is capable of widespread heavy
damage.
   Initial reports indicated widespread damage from Tuesday's
quake, especially affecting highways and old masonry buildings.
   ``It's not like an earthquake of this size in this area is a
calamitous event. It's something we should therefore be ready
for,'' Allen said.
   The damage in the Bay area occurred to the same kind of
structures heavily damaged in the 1987 Whittier quake in the Los
Angeles area, which registered a 5.9 Richter reading, Allen said.
   ``I think we'll learn a lot from an engineering point of view
from this earthquake,'' he said. ``What will be important is to see
how the modern structures behaved.''
   Allen said many of the same kinds of older structures that
appeared to have been damaged in San Francisco also exist in the
Los Angeles region. In addition, some of the roadways and
overpasses in the area have roughly the same kind of construction
as the Bay Bridge.
   In some areas of Southern California, there is a higher
probability of a major quake occurring. The highest, the USGS says,
is in the central California town of Parkfield, where there is a 90
percent probability of a magnitude 6 earthquake by the year 2018.



 AP891018-0084 
AP-NR-10-18-89 0621EDT
u a PM-Quake-Threat Bjt   10-18 0548
PM-Quake-Threat, Bjt,0565
While LA Awaits `The Big One,' Another Killer Quake Hits San Francisco
By LEE SIEGEL
AP Science Writer
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   Ever since the 1906 earthquake devastated San
Francisco, many scientists have believed the next ``big one'' would
strike the Los Angeles end of the mighty San Andreas Fault.
   But studies in recent years have reminded the Bay Area that it
also faced another seismic disaster, and those studies became a
reality Tuesday when a quake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale
rocked the Bay area.
   A 1985 paper in the Geophysical Research Letters predicted a
6.9-magnitude quake could happen any time on a portion of the San
Andreas Fault that stretches 50 miles from Palo Alto southward
through the Santa Cruz Mountains and on to San Juan Bautista.
   The quake was centered on the San Andreas segment described in
the article, but Tom Heaton, the scientist in charge of the U.S.
Geological Survey office in Pasadena, said it wasn't clear yet
whether it broke all or part of the 50-mile segment.
   The epicenter of the quake was about 8 miles northeast of Santa
Cruz and 75 miles south of San Francisco.
   The 1985 study, by Columbia University geology professor
Christopher Scholz, was among several that produced conflicting
estimates on the likelihood and size of the quake that finally
happened Tuesday.
   These studies gave various interpretations of how much stress
inside the Earth was released by the great San Francisco earthquake
of 1906, which had a magnitude of about 8.3 and killed at least
2,500 people.
   The bigger a quake, the more stress it relieves, and thus the
longer it takes for the same size quake to happen again.
   Scholz pointed to evidence that the 1906 quake didn't relieve as
much stress in the Santa Cruz Mountains as other scientists
believed. That suggested a bigger quake might happen in the San
Francisco Bay area sooner than some believed.
   Others disagreed. Faced with conflicting estimates, the
Geological Survey issued a July 1988 report that it said
represented a consensus on the debate.
   The report said the 50-mile segment had a 20 percent likelihood
of producing a magnitude-7 quake within 30 years. It said the
southernmost 20 miles of that segment had a 30 percent chance of
generating a magnitude-6.5 quake within 30 years.
   Tuesday's jolt was centered within those southernmost 20 miles
of the fault segment.
   ``Clearly, scientists had identified this segment as a
particularly hazardous one,'' Heaton said. ``There was some debate
about the length of the rupture and the size of the earthquake.''
   The last great southern California quake, in 1857, killed very
few people in a region that was then sparsely populated.
   Thus most assumed that Los Angeles, not the Bay Area, would fall
victim to the next seismic catastrophe; the 1988 USGS report cast
doubt on this assumption.
   Federal emergency officials have estimated that the next ``big
one'' _ a quake like the 1906 San Francisco quake _ could kill
3,000 to 14,000 people in southern California, and 3,000 to 11,000
people in the Bay Area.
   As bad as Tuesday's quake was, ``it was not a 1906 earthquake,''
Geological Survey director Dalas Peck said.
   ``The question is not whether a big earthquake is coming. The
question is when,'' Peck said.



 AP891019-0037 
AP-NR-10-19-89 0248EDT
r a PM-Quake-Relief     10-19 0725
PM-Quake-Relief,0754
Relief Pours Into Bay Area
By ARTHUR ALLEN
Associated Press Writer

   Private groups and officials from Tokyo to London to Charleston,
S.C., offered help to the ruptured San Francisco Bay area, but some
said relief for the earthquake could drain coffers already strained
by previous disasters.
   Los Angeles, long San Francisco's West Coast competitor but
equally at the mercy of the San Andreas Fault, quickly shipped
doctors, sonic equipment and fire investigators to the Bay Area.
   The mayor of a sister city in disaster, Charleston's Joseph P.
Riley Jr., sent a plane load of drinking water, a symbolic return
of the support his city got after Hugo.
   ``I know we still have and will have great needs here and
charity certainly begins at home,'' Riley said. ``However, it would
be wrong for this community ... not to reach in (our pockets) and
contribute to those who are hurt and suffering right now.''
   San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos has estimated damage $2 billion in
his city alone.
   The Salvation Army had the food cooking almost before the earth
quit shaking in Northern California, while the Red Cross opened the
doors and unfolded cots in 25 shelters.
   ``We don't wait for anybody,'' said Col. Leon Ferraez,
communications director of the Salvation Army. ``We're there the
minute the news is on.''
   According to Ferraez, the organization dispatched 12 mobile
canteens to the hardest-hit earthquake areas within minutes. All
Salvation Army centers in the Bay Area, including 34 community
service centers and scores of other units, have been turned over to
the relief effort.
   Los Angeles donated sonic equipment to help detect sounds of
people trapped in rubble. And officials in Los Alamos, N.M.,
dispatched a device used to locate survivors of last year's
Armenian quake.
   Israel offered the services of a special army rescue squad that
also helped dig out victims in Armenia. A French disaster relief
agency offered to send special teams of searchers.
   A team of British engineers were to fly to San Francisco today
to help assess structural damage from the quake.
   The Bay Area has a large Asian population, and callers from
Japan and the Philippines and other countries jammed phone lines
trying to reach relatives.
   The Osaka, Japan, city government announced it was sending
$10,000 to San Francisco, a sister city since 1957.
   Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley sent police and fire investigators
to assess damage from the quake, and convened his own emergency
council in a special meeting to discuss other possible measures.
   ``I am joining millions of Californians as we intensely watch
the damage of the large San Francisco earthquake,'' said Bradley.
``We all know the horrors of an earthquake and we express our
deep-felt sympathy for the people of the San Francisco Bay area.''
   An Anheuser-Busch Inc. brewery in Fairfield, 35 miles northeast
of San Francisco, interrupted normal operations to fill cans with
drinking water instead of beer for free shipment to relief
agencies, the company said.
   Coast Guard offices across the West Coast provided San Francisco
with as many boats and helicopters as could be spared, said Coast
Guard spokeswoman Elizabeth Neely.
   The Red Cross sent 290 units of blood from Los Angeles; the San
Diego Blood Bank rushed 50 units to San Francisco within an hour of
the quake; more than 400 units were sent from Portland, Ore.
   ``Giving makes them feel good,'' said Trudy Sullivan, a Red
Cross spokeswoman in Portland.
   Even the Internal Revenue Service got into the act, announcing
it would waive penalties for taxpayers unable to file returns or
make scheduled payments because of the earthquake.
   President Bush directed $273 million in immediate aid for quake
victims and said he would visit the area Friday or Saturday.
   But some officials said the disaster could strain the coffers of
private agencies and those of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, which was criticized for its response to the storm-lashed
Carolinas.
   The Red Cross began its fiscal year July 1 with $18.5 million in
its disaster budget, and had spent 40 percent by September. Then
Hugo came along, triggering an effort the agency estimates will
cost $42 million _ the most ever.
   ``When a major earthquake and a major hurricane hit
back-to-back, you can bet it will stretch Red Cross disaster
resources and manpower,'' said Bob Vessey, director of disaster
services in Washington, D.C.



 LA101889-0066 
 122132 


October 18, 1989, Wednesday, Home Edition 




Part A; Page 4; Column 4; Metro Desk 




1204 words 




SCIENTISTS LAST YEAR HAD PINPOINTED TUESDAY'S SITE AS LIKELY TO BE JOLTED 




By KENNETH REICH, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




Tuesday's earthquake, the strongest on the San Andreas fault since the San 
Francisco quake on April 18, 1906, came in a place that had been identified by 
scientists just last year as the most likely spot for a major jolt in Northern 
California within the next 30 years. 


The epicenter of the temblor, eight miles east-northeast of the city of Santa 
Cruz in the Santa Cruz Mountains, was at virtually the same spot as earthquakes 
in the 5-magnitude range that occurred on June 27, 1988, and Aug. 8, 1989. A 
6.5-magnitude quake was centered there in 1865. 


The U.S. Geological Survey, in a 1988 report on regions of high earthquake 
probability in California, said there was a 30% chance of another 6.5-magnitude 
earthquake in the immediate vicinity by the year 2018. 


The report cited even higher probabilities for major temblors on the San 
Andreas near Parkfield in central California and Coachella in Southern 
California in the same period, but it pinpointed the Santa Cruz mountains as 
the most vulnerable spot in Northern California, in part because the area 
marked the southernmost point of maximum ground slippage during the 1906 
earthquake. 


A period of 83 years is short as far as earthquake intervals go, and during 
this time, scientists said Tuesday night, pressure was probably building up in 
the southern neighboring segment of the San Andreas, which had not slipped as 
much. 


Thomas Heaton, the Geological Survey scientist in charge of the agency's 
Pasadena field office, said that the 1987 and 1988 earthquakes now must be seen 
as "preshocks" of the Tuesday's 6.9 temblor. He said "foreshocks" would not be 
the proper term, since months had elapsed before the more powerful earthquake 
struck. 


Heaton said that a still larger shock is unlikely. But he joined Caltech 
scientists in saying that aftershocks as strong as 5.9 magnitude should be 
expected, and that the pattern of aftershocks could last for months. A 5.9 
aftershock would be as strong as the 1987 Whittier quake in the Los Angeles 
area. 


After both the 1987 and the 1988 earthquakes in the Santa Cruz mountains, the 
state Office of Emergency Services and the U.S. Geological Survey issued 
warnings of increased risk of sizable shakes, ranging up to 6.5 magnitude, 
within the next few days in the vicinity. 


But these warnings said that if nothing happened, then the chances of a major 
earthquake would recede to normal for the vicinity. The trouble was, the area 
was more prone to quakes at this time than any other place in the Bay Area on 
the San Andreas Fault. Only the nearby Hayward fault may harbor as great a 
danger of a catastrophic earthquake in the Bay Area. 


The San Andreas, the longest and best-known earthquake fault in California, 
extends from Point Arena in Mendocino County to the Salton Sea. It has been the 
site of the deadliest and most destructive earthquakes in the state's recorded 
history. 


Although Tuesday's quake was powerful, Waverly Person, chief of the National 
Earthquake Information Service in Golden, Colo., cautioned that at 6.9 
magnitude, it should be considered only a "strong" shock, not a "major" one, as 
a quake in the 7.0 to 7.9 range would be classified, or a "great" one, as a 
quake of 8.0 or above would be. 


Person and others in the Geological Survey warned Tuesday night that the 
probability is 40% that a temblor more powerful than Tuesday's will strike in 
Southern California sometime in the next three decades. 


But, as it was, Tuesday's quake was about four times stronger than the 
devastating Sylmar-San Fernando earthquake of 1971 and 10 times stronger than 
the 1987 Whittier quake. Each point of magnitude represents a 10-fold increase 
in the power of an earthquake. 


Person said that, like most San Andreas earthquakes, this was most likely to be 
a strike-slip quake, with one side of the fault grinding horizontally past 
another. But he said a final evaluation would have to await on-scene inspection 
teams that will be sent into the epicenter area today by the Geological 
Survey's Menlo Park office. 


Jim Dewey, a research geophysicist at the National Earthquake Center, said 
preliminary evaluations indicated that the fracture was about 10 miles deep, 
and that the quake rupture extended about 30 miles south down the fault from 
the epicenter. 


Person said that the area of strongest shaking was around Santa Cruz, although 
this evaluation too will have to await field evaluations, as will a final 
confirmation of the magnitude of the earthquake. 


The nearest metropolitan area to Tuesday's earthquake, San Jose, has seen 
nearly a dozen earthquakes of 5 magnitude or greater in the last 10 years, but 
several of them have been on the Calaveras fault, which generally runs just 
east of San Jose, more than 10 miles east of San Andreas at this point. 


Scientists do not yet understand whether the quakes on the Calaveras fault may 
have been a precursor, or somehow added pressure, on the San Andreas. But when 
a 5.1 earthquake did strike on the Calaveras in 1988, some earthquake 
scientists expressed concern that this could be the case. 


Between the late 1950s and 1979, there were no quakes of magnitude 5 or larger 
near the Bay Area. But in August, 1979, a 6.4-magnitude quake struck under 
Coyote Lake east of Gilroy and south of San Jose, and since then there have 
been a number of quakes. 


In August, Geological Survey scientists had expressed concern at the step-up in 
5-magnitude quakes south of the Bay Area. They noted that a similar series of 
moderately strong quakes had preceded the San Francisco quake of 1906. 


Meanwhile, a New Mexico scientist who studies tidal forces, supported by two 
eyewitnesses, said Tuesday night that at a private lecture in San Francisco on 
Oct. 10, he had stated that a strong quake in the vicinity was probable on or 
about Oct. 16. 


Iben Browning, of Sandia Park, N. M., said he had based his prediction on an 
assessment of tidal forces caused by the moon's relationship with the Earth. He 
said he had decided to keep the assessment private because he feared that 
publicity about it would cause people to panic. 




MAJOR QUAKE DAMAGE 


1 -- Major fires hit Marina District. 


2 -- Civic Center area buildings damaged, a 4-story building south of Market 
collapsed, killing 5. 


3 -- Central Freeway (101 inside San Francisco city limits) buckled and closed. 


4 -- Embarcadero Freeway damaged and shut. 


5 -- Interstate 280 from junction with Rt. 101 to downtown closed. 


6 -- Candlestick Park damaged, evacuated. 


7 -- San Francisco Airport closed, control tower reportedly in shambles. 


8 -- Portion of San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge at eastern end collapsed; one 
person reported killed. 


9 -- Bay Area Rapid Transit system shut down. 


10 -- Double-decked portion of Interstate 880 (Nimitz Freeway) collapsed. 
Estimates were as high as 200 dead and hundreds injured. 


11 -- Highway 17 in Oakland closed at Summit St. overcrossing because of 
collapse. 


12 -- Oakland Airport closed. 




OTHER AREAS OF DAMAGE 


Major damage to interchange of Bayshore Fwy (101) and State Route 92 in San 
Mateo. 


Damage to 3rd Avenue overpass in San Mateo. 


Portions of Interstate 280 closed in Los Altos due to buckling. 


Two killed at Santa Cruz shopping mall. 




Map, MAJOR QUAKE DAMAGE, ROBERT ALLEN / Los Angeles Times 




EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; FORECASTS; EARTHQUAKES -- CALIFORNIA; SAN ANDREAS 
FAULT; SANTA CRUZ (CA); CALAVERAS FAULT; SCIENTISTS; SEISMOLOGY; EARTHQUAKES -- 
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 




 LA101889-0108 
 122234 


October 18, 1989, Wednesday, Home Edition 




Sports; Part C; Page 9; Column 2; Sports Desk 




241 words 




THE WORLD SERIES; 


OAKLAND ATHLETICS VS. SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS; 


EXPERIENCE AT CANDLESTICK IS ONE REPORTER WILL NOT SOON FORGET 




By LARRY STEWART 




SAN FRANCISCO 




There are events one never forgets. 


Anyone who was alive in 1963 remembers where he was when President Kennedy was 
assassinated. 


And anyone who was at Candlestick Park Tuesday night for Game 3 of the World 
Series will never forget. 


I was in a trailer just outside the stadium, about to watch the telecast when 
the earthquake hit. It was shortly after the network went on the air. 


My immediate reaction was that a jet was flying very low overhead, but soon I 
knew what was happening. 


To me, the earthquake was not as bad as the Whittier quake in October, 1987, 
mainly because I was awake this time. 


I opened the door to the trailer and looked out. The stadium was shaking and 
the special concrete joint -- one of several strategically spaced around the 
top of the stadium to prevent earthquake damage -- was doing was it was 
designed to do. It was opening and closing as if the place was made of 
cardboard instead of concrete. 


A few people were running out of the stadium, but there did not seem to be 
great alarm, because the quake did not last long. 


I walked into the stadium to interview fans. And again, I sensed little panic. 


Most people stayed in their seats, waiting to hear whether the game would be 
postponed. 


And later, when fans started leaving en masse, the reaction of those I talked 
to varied. Those who were sitting in the upper deck seemed considerably more 
shaken than those in the lower levels. LARRY STEWART 




WORLD SERIES; SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS (BASEBALL TEAM); OAKLAND A'S (BASEBALL 
TEAM); EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; EARTHQUAKES -- NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; 
CANDLESTICK PARK; DISASTERS; REPORTERS 




 LA102089-0172 
 123452 


October 20, 1989, Friday, Home Edition 




Special Section; Part Q; Page 6; Column 1; Metro Desk 




956 words 




THE BAY AREA QUAKE; 


PRESSURE POINTS; 


WHAT WORKED, WHAT DIDN'T, AND WHY; 


BUILDINGS; 


SURVIVAL MAY DEPEND ON SOLID FOUNDATIONS 




By ROBERT WELKOS, TIMES STAFF WRITER 




On Telegraph Hill, Jerry Lubenow got his biggest shock when he arrived at his 
apartment after the deadly earthquake. 


"There was no damage to our place or in our neighborhood," he said. 


The only thing Lubenow could figure out was that "Telegraph Hill is on rock." 
He then talked to friends who live on Nob Hill and Russian Hill, which are also 
situated on rock, and learned that their residences also avoided damage. 


"You almost feel guilty," he said, referring to his own good fortune. "(It's) 
like living through the blitz in London in the Second World War." 


Only a few miles away in San Francisco's affluent Marina District, dozens of 
fashionable townhouses were damaged or destroyed. Some buckled and pitched 
forward off their foundations into the street. Others appeared outwardly sound 
but sustained interior damage that rendered them uninhabitable. 


Why did some of the luxury, four-story apartment buildings collapse at the 
Marina while in nearby Chinatown, shops made of unreinforced masonry sustained 
little damage in the 6.9 temblor? 


Why did high-rises that form the elegant San Francisco skyline escape virtually 
unscathed while an office building in the city's southeast district peel apart, 
killing five pedestrians below? 


"The buildings that collapsed did so because of a combination of two things: 
very poor soil and very poor structural design," said Peter I. Yanev, chairman 
of EQE Engineering Inc., a structural engineering firm in San Francisco. 


"They were on top of the worst soil conditions in the city," explained Yanev, 
who said he has traveled to "all the major earthquakes" in the last 20 years 
studying their impact on construction. 


The soil beneath the Marina District, where six buildings burned down or 
collapsed, is made up of landfill partly dredged from the bay more than 70 
years ago. 


Yanev said many of the buildings in the neighborhood were erected in the early 
part of this century when there were no earthquake codes. 


"What collapsed and killed some people were four-story apartment buildings that 
had garages built all the way along the bottom (floor)," Yanev said. "So, you 
have a bunch of garages underneath all these apartments. You effectively have 
no walls on one side of the building. The connections just break, and the front 
end falls into the street." 


Yanev called the two conditions a "disaster waiting to happen." 


"Should we have an earthquake centered off the Golden Gate Bridge instead of 
Santa Cruz, you'd probably have hundreds of these buildings collapse," he said. 


Experts said they did not anticipate that the Marina District would be the 
major problem in an earthquake. The worst areas, they believed, would be 
Chinatown and the Tenderloin, where brick buildings abound. 


Chinatown survived relatively intact, Yanev said, because it is located "up in 
the hills" atop "very firm soil," and the epicenter of the temblor was many 
miles away. 


In the city's high-rise office towers, a few broken windows and other cosmetic 
damage could be seen. A preliminary survey found only three skyscrapers 
rendered unsafe by the quake. But most buildings, including the landmark 
Transamerica Pyramid, were not touched. 


Jay Cahill, an owner of Cahill Construction Co., a contractor that built 
several high-rises in the city, said the earthquake codes "did their job." 


"What this quake proves is that the engineers were right" when they said tall 
buildings could withstand a strong quake, he said. They said the downtown 
buildings are constructed to withstand a quake of at least 8 magnitude with an 
epicenter in San Francisco. 


Earthquake experts said they were not surprised that the high-rises swayed with 
the earthquake while four-story buildings collapsed. 


"An earthquake means that the ground shakes, and that means force is applied to 
the sides of buildings," said George C. Lee, acting director of the National 
Center for Earthquake Engineering Research at the University of Buffalo. 


When architects design skyscrapers, Lee said, they factor in wind gusts and 
earth movement -- forces that are not considered as much when constructing 
smaller buildings. 


In smaller buildings, he said, contractors usually make sure that vertical 
forces -- such as snow and ice -- cannot force a structure to collapse. 


Throughout the Bay Area, residents were left to puzzle over why the earthquake 
savaged some buildings and bypassed others, much like San Francisco was left to 
wonder why the Marina District was hard hit and others spared. 


In Santa Cruz, initial damages were estimated at $350 million, and 30% of the 
downtown mall -- the heart of the city -- was severely damaged. An estimated 20 
commercial buildings must be razed, a county official said. 


In Los Gatos, 30 miles northeast of Santa Cruz, portions of the downtown area 
were destroyed. Several dozen Victorian homes were shifted off their 
foundations, and numerous chimneys crumbled. 


San Francisco fire officials said as many as 60 buildings in the Marina 
District may have to be torn down because of structural instability caused by 
the earthquake. 


"Some of the buildings are extremely hazardous," Assistant Fire Chief Frank 
Blackburn said. "They are four-story buildings above garages. All they had were 
vertical columns holding up the structures. If you picture a building sitting 
on columns with no lateral support on those columns, when you get sideways 
motion, the buildings slide left and right." 


Blackburn said many residents are not going to be able to get their belongings 
out. 


"If a (big) aftershock comes, it'll collapse," he said. 




Buildings collapsed like cakes without yeast. One fourth-floor apartment 
dweller stepped through her window onto the street after her building crumbled 
beneath her. 




Photo, Military police guard Marina District building that was damaged by 
quake. United Press International 




BUILDING COLLAPSES; EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; EARTHQUAKES -- NORTHERN 
CALIFORNIA; OAKLAND (CA); SURVIVAL; EARTHQUAKE SAFETY; BUILDING SAFETY; 
APARTMENTS; HOUSING -- SAN FRANCISCO 




 LA102089-0177 
 123463 


October 20, 1989, Friday, Home Edition 




Special Section; Part Q; Page 12; Column 4; Metro Desk 




151 words 




THE BAY AREA QUAKE; 


WHAT NEXT?; 


PONDERING THE LESSONS, HEALING THE SCARS 




"I've been wandering around San Francisco and it's like the blind man trying to 
feel an elephant. We're just now figuring out bits and pieces of this 
disaster." -- Tom Tobin, of the California Seismic Safety Commission. 




"It was like somebody slugging a punching bag. Usually earthquakes pass, but 
this one went on and on. It just wouldn't stop...It was very, very bad." -- 
Schoolteacher Flora Churnin, who was at her Silicon Valley town of Sunnyvale 
when the earthquake struck. 




"At first I thought the smoke was fog. Then I could see a big ball of flame." 
-- Cecile Candone, who was driving south toward San Francisco from the Sonoma 
wine country when she spotted the Marina district fire. 




"This upper deck was absolutely shaking, the light stanchions were blowing back 
and forth." -- Suzyn Waldman, a reporter covering the World Series at 
Candlestick Park for a New York radio station. 




EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; EARTHQUAKES -- NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; OAKLAND (CA); 
DISASTER VICTIMS 




 LA102389-0075 
 124632 


October 23, 1989, Monday, Home Edition 




Part A; Page 18; Column 2; Metro Desk 




902 words 




BAY AREA QUAKE; 


SISTER CITIES IN THE ANNALS OF NATURAL DISASTERS; 


HISTORY: CHARLESTON AND SAN FRANCISCO ARE ON OPPOSITE ENDS OF THE COUNTRY, BUT 
A HURRICANE AND A QUAKE BRING THEM TOGETHER IN TIME'S LEDGER. 




By LARRY GREEN and BOB SECTER, TIMES STAFF WRITERS 




SAN FRANCISCO 




Although they are a continent apart, the cities of Charleston, S.C., and San 
Francisco now share a fateful page in the ledger of time. They are the scenes 
of two of the century's costliest, back-to-back natural disasters: Hurricane 
Hugo and the Bay Area earthquake. 


There are dramatic similarities and profound differences in the ways these two 
cities were affected and altered in the first week after they were ravaged by 
two powerful forces of nature -- one that angrily swept across the land from 
the sea and one that violently rumbled beneath the earth. 


"From the standpoint of compassion, of all the people in America we can feel 
the hurt that the San Francisco area is going through the most," Charleston 
Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. said Sunday, one month after Hugo hit. "We know it 
means, at best, the disruption of normal life for some time and, at worst, the 
loss of life." 


Charleston had warning. San Francisco did not. Unlike earthquakes, hurricanes 
can be tracked by planes and radar, their paths predicted with sufficient 
certainty for those in harm's way to secure property and to flee. Still, at 
least 28 deaths in the Carolinas are blamed on Hugo, while at least 60 deaths 
have been attributed to the Bay Area earthquake. 


Hugo, 500 miles across with winds topping 175 m.p.h., left virtually every 
street and every neighborhood littered with storm debris and 80% of the city's 
buildings with some degree of damage. Five days after the storm, many city 
residents remained inconvenienced, most without electricity, many without safe 
drinking water. Street lights didn't work. Broken glass and other debris left 
the roadsides lined with cars stopped by flat tires. 


By contrast the streets in most of San Francisco were passable within a day of 
the earthquake. Electricity was largely restored overnight. And most broken 
natural gas lines were quickly repaired. Restaurants in Chinatown, North Beach 
and along Fillmore Street were crowded Saturday night. Cable cars began 
carrying passengers Sunday and the curtain went up on the opera. 


"Their streets were immediately passable," said Charleston Police Chief Ruben 
Greenberg. "We were gridlocked for two days because of the debris." 


And a week after the hurricane, Charleston -- which like San Francisco has a 
tourism-based economy -- was still trying to cope with mountains of broken 
trees and shattered roofs. It was more than 10 days before restaurants and 
other stores began to slowly reopen and twice as long for night life to begin 
to return. 


Tour Buses Return 


By Sunday, tourists and tour buses could be seen outside hotels near 
Fisherman's Wharf and at other locations favored by visitors. Tourism is a 
$2.5-billion-a-year business in San Francisco. 


It took almost three weeks for businesses that cater to tourists to get back on 
their feet in Charleston. It's likely to take a lot longer for the tourists 
themselves to return in numbers that made it one of the city's biggest 
industries. 


Citywide, Charleston had 68 buildings collapse, compared to 60 buildings 
destroyed just in San Francisco's Marina District. 


In Charleston most of the damage could be quickly assessed. It was visible. In 
San Francisco much of the damage may still be undetected. Water mains and gas 
lines weakened by the heaving earth may not break for weeks or months. 
Structural damage to houses, in many instances, will become apparent over a 
long period of time. 


"When a hurricane is over, it's over," Greenberg said. "Not so with an 
earthquake. You have aftershocks." 


Charleston also escaped widespread damage to its infrastructure. 


"We lost no major economic area like the Bay Bridge," said Greenberg, who was 
once San Francisco's undersheriff and who returned with emergency supplies to 
help the Santa Cruz police. "That's an economic lifeline. All we lost was one 
minor bridge. They're going to have humongous traffic problems." 


Hugo left Charleston isolated from the world. Communications broke down soon 
after the storm crossed the coastline about midnight and it was daybreak before 
the nation began to learn of the widespread damage. Even local residents were 
left without any information. The hurricane knocked out all local television 
and radio stations, and local officials for almost two days depended on a 
Florida radio station to deliver vital information and warnings. 


Millions were watching the pregame World Series program when the earthquake 
struck, and instantly word was out that there had been a disaster. San 
Francisco stations were able to broadcast to residents who had battery-powered 
radios and TVs. 


Damage estimates from Hugo have ranged as high as $5 billion, while earthquake 
damage estimates Sunday reached the $6.6 billion mark. 


Besides that black page in the ledger of history, both San Francisco and 
Charleston also have another experience in common: Both have experienced 
frustrating delays in getting disaster relief from the federal government. 


Greenberg, who has now watched the federal government respond to two of 
America's worst disasters, said he sees relatively few differences between how 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency worked in South Carolina and Northern 
California. 


"There's nothing that needs to be done in a hurry with them," he said. "They 
just plop along like one of the horses at Disneyland. Just plop, plop, plop. 
They are repeating the mistakes of South Carolina in California." 




EARTHQUAKES -- SAN FRANCISCO; EARTHQUAKES -- NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; HURRICANES -- 
SOUTH CAROLINA; SAN FRANCISCO; CHARLESTON (SC); DISASTERS 




 AP880217-0100 
AP-NR-02-17-88 1039EST
r a PM-Oscar-Vitals     02-17 0202
PM-Oscar-Vitals,0207
Statistics on Six Decades of Oscar
With PM-Oscar Nominations Bjt
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   The motion picture industry's most coveted
award, Oscar, was created 60 years ago and 1,816 of the statuettes
have been produced so far.
   Weighing 8{ pounds and standing 13{ inches tall, Oscar was
created by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios art director Cedric Gibbons,
who went on to win 11 of the trophies.
   Oscar, manufactured by the R.S. Owens Co., Chicago, is made of
Britannia metal, copper plate, nickel plate and gold plate. From
1942 to 1944, the trophy was made of plaster, but winners were
later presented with the real thing.
   According to the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences,
the only engraving mistake was in 1938 when the best actor trophy
given to Spencer Tracy for ``Boy's Town'' read: ``Best Actor: Dick
Tracy.''
   The Academy holds all the rights on the statue and ``reserves
the right to buy back an Oscar before someone takes it to a pawn
shop,'' said Academy spokesman Bob Werden.
   The most-nominated film was ``All About Eve'' in 1950. It got 14
nominations. ``Ben-Hur'' in 1959 was the most-awarded film with 11,
and Walt Disney was the most-awarded person with 32.



 AP880325-0239 
AP-NR-03-25-88 0908EST
a e AM-APArts:Oscars-Overlooked Adv28   03-25 0704
AM-AP Arts: Oscars-Overlooked, Adv 28,0723
$Adv28
For Release Mon AMs, March 28 and Thereafter
Oscar Countdown: The Overlooked
Oscar Snubs The Best and The Brightest
By BOB THOMAS
Associated Press Writer
HOLLYWOOD (AP) 

   What do Charlie Chaplin, Greta Garbo, Cary
Grant, Alfred Hitchcock and Steven Spielberg have in common? They
have never won Academy Awards for their individual achievements.
   Such flagrant omissions are often cited by critics as evidence
of the unfairness of Hollywood's highest prize. Oscar's 60-year
history is filled with examples of the film world's highest
achievers being overlooked by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts
and Sciences.
   The latest casualties are directors James L. Brooks, whose movie
``Broadcast News'' was nominated though he wasn't, and Spielberg
who was left out in the cold with his ``Empire of the Sun.''
   Although ``Broadcast News'' won seven major nominations,
including best picture and three acting categories, Brooks was
strangely overlooked by the Academy's directing branch.
   Since no movie has ever won a best picture Oscar without its
director at least being nominated, the chances of the once-favored
``Broadcast News'' to be a big winner at the awards ceremony on
April 11 have been significantly reduced.
   Brooks did better in 1984 when his ``Terms of Endearment'' took
the lion's share of Oscars, including best picture and director.
   Spielberg's ``Empire of the Sun'' won six nominations this year,
none of them major and none for director. Two years ago, ``The
Color Purple'' received 11 nominations but not for him as director.
The Directors Guild nevertheless named him best director that year.
   ``I'm floored by this,'' Spielberg said upon receiving his DGA
award. ``This is the last thing I expected to happen. ... If some
of you are making a statement _ thank God _ I thank you for that.''
   Why the Spielberg slight? Some observers cite the fact that only
257 directors nominate for the Academy Awards, and many are
veterans who might not look kindly on the young man whose films are
the biggest moneymakers in history (``Jaws,'' ``E.T.,'' ``Raiders
of the Lost Ark'').
   The Academy appeared to make amends last year by presenting
Spielberg with the Irving Thalberg award for ``consistently high
quality of production.'' There was no mention of the fact that
Spielberg is primarily a director, not a producer.
   The Thalberg award has come in handy to acknowledge giants who
were overlooked for individual awards. The recipients have included
Cecil B. DeMille, Stanley Kramer, Alfred Hitchcock, Ingmar Bergman
and Mervyn Leroy.
   The honorary award has also proved useful to salve the Academy's
conscience. Charlie Chaplin received one at the first Academy
Awards for his creation of ``The Circus'' and again at the 44th
awards for ``the incalculable effect he has had in making motion
pictures the art form of this century.''
   Douglas Fairbanks, Judy Garland, Noel Coward, Ernst Lubitsch,
Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Harold Lloyd, Greta Garbo, Maurice
Chevalier, Stan Laurel, Cary Grant, Lillian Gish, Edward G.
Robinson, Groucho Marx, Howard Hawks and Jean Renoir are others who
have received honorary awards.
   Cary Grant once remarked that he never expected to win an
Academy Award. ``I'd have to blacken my teeth first,'' he quipped,
alluding to the Academy's fondness for actors who portray bums and
downtrodden characters.
   Alfred Hitchcock also had a lighthearted comment on why he
failed to win an Oscar: ``I suppose it was a matter of
carelessness.''
   The overlooking of classic films and the industry's most
talented filmmakers has provided historians with cause for dispute.
   For example, ``Citizen Kane,'' which customarily places No. 1 on
polls of the greatest American films, was nominated in 1941 for
best picture (there were 10 nominees in those days), for Orson
Welles' performance, direction and co-scripting with Herman
Mankiewicz, Gregg Toland's camera work, plus art direction, sound,
music and editing.
   The only Oscar for ``Citizen Kane'' was for the script. ``How
Green Was My Valley'' was named best picture.
   Billy Wilder's classic comedy, ``Some Like It Hot,'' failed to
be nominated as best picture, as did Chaplin's ``Modern Times,''
Hawks' ``Red River'' and Woody Allen's ``Manhattan.''
   Oh, well. Oscar might use Joe E. Brown's final line from ``Some
Like It Hot'': ``Nobody's perfect.''

End Adv for Mon AMs, March 28


 AP880328-0206 
AP-NR-03-28-88 1345EST
s e BC-APN--Oscars-Questions Adv10   03-28 0411
BC-APN--Oscars-Questions, Adv 10,0432
$adv10
AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT
For Release Sunday, April 10
From AP Newsfeatures
With BC-APN-Oscars

   
   HOLLYWOOD (AP) _ Like all great contests, the annual Academy
Awards ceremony has generated a wealth of statistics and trivia
over its 60 years of existence, all carefully chronicled by Oscar
historians.
   Here, courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
Sciences, are 20 questions about Oscar:
   1. What actress has received the most Oscars? Katharine Hepburn,
4.
   2. What actor has received the most Oscars? Walter Brennan, 3.
   3. What director has received the most Oscars? John Ford, 4.
   4. Who is the most nominated actress? Katharine Hepburn, 12.
   5. Who is the most nominated actor? Laurence Olivier, 10.
   6. Who is the most nominated director? William Wyler, 12.
   7. How long was the longest Oscar ceremony? 3 hours, 45 minutes
in 1985.
   8. What film has won the most Oscars? ``Ben-Hur,'' 11, 1959.
   9. What was the most nominated picture? ``Gone With The Wind,''
``Mary Poppins'' and ``Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf,'' each with
13.
   10. What studio has won the most Oscars? MGM, with nearly 200.
   11. Who was the youngest performer to win an Oscar? Tatum
O'Neal, 10, supporting actress, ``Paper Moon,'' 1973.
   12. Who was the oldest performer ever to win an Oscar? Groucho
Marx, 83, an honorary award in 1974. George Burns is the oldest
actor to win a performing Oscar, 80, for the ``The Sunshine Boys''
in 1976.
   13. What actor won a posthumous award? Peter Finch, ``Network,''
1976.
   14. What father-son team won Oscars in the same picture? Walter
Huston, supporting actor, and John Huston, director-writer, ``The
Treasure of Sierra Madre,'' 1948.
   15. What actor was nominated in two categories for the same
role? Barry Fitzgerald, ``Going My Way,'' 1944. He won in the
supporting category.
   16. Who decapitated his Oscar while practicing golf swings
indoors? Barry Fitzgerald. His 1944 supporting actor statuette was
subsequently replaced by the Academy.
   17. What performers have refused their Oscars? George C. Scott
and Marlon Brando.
   18. How many people view the Oscar ceremony on television? Last
year, the Oscarcast was seen by one billion people in 79 countries.
   19. Who holds the record for the fastest televised reading of
the famed Academy rules? Actor-comedian John (Federal Express)
Moschitta, 25 seconds, 1983.
   20. What multiple Oscar winner has never appeared to collect her
award? Katharine Hepburn, all four times.

END ADV for Sunday, April 10


 AP890323-0218 
AP-NR-03-23-89 1129EST
a e PM-APArts:Oscar-Voting Adv24   03-23 0889
PM-AP Arts: Oscar-Voting, Adv 24,0909
$Adv 24
For Release Fri PMs, March 24 and Thereafter
Oscar Ballot Comes Under Scrutiny As Some Allege Team Voting
By JOHN HORN
Associated Press Writer
HOLLYWOOD (AP) 

   Oscar selection has come under scrutiny as film
studios go to new lengths to pull votes out of the Academy of Motion
Picture Arts and Sciences.
   And with the flood of Oscar vote enticements _ from free coffee
mugs to complimentary buffet dinners _ Academy members are
acknowledging that some Oscar voting is done by committee, in
violation of the rules. Secretaries, spouses and friends, several
Academy members say, are marking ballots in what is supposed to be
the entertainment industry's most esteemed awards competition.
   ``It's like a local election of judges,'' said Academy member
Harry Clein, who said he's witnessed team voting. ``A lot of people
don't know who the candidates are. So they take a look at who's
around them and see what the consensus is.
   ``As far as elections go, it's not bad. But I've never been
through an election in Argentina.''
   Dan Lyle, who oversees the Oscar balloting for the accounting
firm Price, Waterhouse Inc., said that there is no guarantee that
Academy members have actually filled out their own ballots.
   ``All we know is that a properly numbered ballot has been
returned,'' he said. ``Members are on the honor system to fill out
the ballot themselves.''
   More than 4,600 members were given ballots this year for the 61st
Annual Academy Awards, which will be telecast on March 29 from the
Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. Academy members vote on their area
of specialty. The Academy's actors branch, for example, is the only
group to select nominees in the four acting categories.
   Since the voting is done secretly _ members do not sign their
ballots _ the ballot's authenticity is ensured solely by a numeric
control number, Lyle said. Ballots are invalidated only if there is
more than one vote in a given category, and only the votes in that
specific category are not tallied, he said.
   Nominations for acting, directing, art direction and all
specialized categories are handled by select branches and committees
composed of Academy members.
   All voting members of the Academy can participate in the best
picture nominations and may vote for the final awards in all
categories. Winners for best documentary feature, best animated
short film and best live-action short film are chosen by only those
members who have seen all the nominees.
   Academy constituent Julian Blaustein said that most of his
colleagues take the voting very seriously. ``I don't even vote (in a
category) if I'm not familiar with the pictures in that category.
... And I've never told someone to vote for a film, even when I've
done some of them.''
   Meanwhile, other Oscar voting rules are perhaps being broken,
speculates veteran Academy member Millard Kaufman. ``Although you're
asked to vote in the nominations for five pictures, I think a lot of
people figure out that they have a better chance if they just vote
for their own picture and leave the other four blank,'' he said.
   Given the tremendous impact both an Oscar nomination and an Oscar
victory have on a film's fortunes, it's not entirely surprising that
a certain degree of artifice might surround the Oscars.
   ``The Last Emperor'' took in $18.9 million, close to half the
film's gross, after it won last year's best picture trophy. More
than 70 percent of the revenues generated by 1986's best picture,
``Platoon,'' came after the film was nominated. On average, a best
picture award is worth about $20 million these days.
   A $500,000 Oscar promotional campaign mounted by a studio,
therefore, can be a good investment. In the case of this year's
awards, a flurry of Academy-oriented newspaper advertisements,
banquets, complimentary gifts and photo mailings tied to five late
releases appears to have been remarkably successful.
   This year, all best picture nominees and the large majority of
top acting nominees came from movies released in December: ``The
Accidental Tourist,'' ``Dangerous Liaisons,'' ``Rain Man'' and
``Working Girl'' were all released after Dec. 16.
   While these five movies might be good, the nearly complete
exclusion of films from the rest of the year has highlighted the
studios' mastery of Oscar marketing.
   ``I think the Academy Awards are crap,'' said Terry Gilliam,
director of ``Brazil'' and the current ``The Adventures of Baron
Munchausen.''
   ``It's about selling films is all it's about,'' he said. ``It's
one more way of flogging some films. When `Brazil' got nominated (in
1986), they asked me to be a member of the Academy. And I wouldn't
join. I just don't want to be a part of that at all.''
   And at least one prominent Academy member, director Carl Reiner,
says that the manipulation of Oscar voters has reached new depths.
Reiner said that Universal Studios' all-out effort to bag votes for
Sigourney Weaver, a best actress nominee for ``Gorillas in the
Mist,'' could lead him to vote against the film.
   ``I have in my house more color reproductions of Sigourney Weaver
and a beautiful gorilla than I need,'' Reiner said of promotional
material sent to his home. ``We've got to tell the Academy to stop
this advertising. I'm getting turned off on the pictures I like.''

End Adv PM Fri March 24


 AP890324-0014 
AP-NR-03-24-89 0733EST
r a PM-APArts:Oscar-Auction     03-24 0750
PM-AP Arts: Oscar-Auction,0768
As Commercialism Creeps In, Academy Fights To Save Oscar Integrity
Eds: Also in Friday AMs report.
By JOHN HORN
Associated Press Writer
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   Free enterprise has collided with the Academy
Awards, and everybody's trying to pick up the pieces.
   With Oscar statuettes selling at auction for more than $10,000
and a Chicago trophy company casting alleged Academy Award clones,
the National Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is
scrambling to make sure Oscar's golden sheen isn't tarnished by
Hollywood hucksterism.
   ``If you know about an infringement and fail to object to it, you
risk having your trademark become public domain,'' said Bruce Davis,
the Academy's executive administrator, in explaining the lawsuits
the organization has filed to protect its beloved hunk of
electroplated pewter.
   But despite the Academy's crusade against crass commercialism,
this year's awards ceremony will feature a new merchandising
wrinkle: Some 800 limousines delivering the most famous stars to the
Oscar telecast will be equipped with door-mounted coolers jammed
with Diet Coke, Coca-Cola Classic and other Coca-Cola Co. beverages.
   When the limo doors swing open in front of the Shrine Auditorium
and the celebrities tumble out, the Coke logo will be on display in
front of an audience that includes millions around the world.
   ``It seemed like a good marketing opportunity,'' said Coca-Cola
spokesman Ira Gleser. ``The Academy approached our local bottler in
Los Angeles and said we're going to have a lot of thirsty people.''
   But even as the Academy embraces this new intrusion of
merchandising, it has lashed out at whatever else it considers a
blemishing of the Oscar name.
   When MGM-UA, the distributor of ``Rain Man,'' published newspaper
advertisements touting the film's Oscar nominations before the
nominations were even announced, the Academy issued a harsh
statement condemning MGM-UA's promotional gamble. After the ads
appeared, ``Rain Man'' collected nine nominations.
   ``We regard this as a serious matter, and we have communicated
our concern,'' said Richard Kahn, president of the Academy.
   For nearly 50 years, the Academy has maintained strict security
around both the nominations and the award winners. It also has
envisoned the statuette itself as something of an icon.
   So auctioning the Oscar has greatly distressed the Academy.
   The Collector's Book Store, local sponsors of monthly
entertainment memorabilia auctions, has sold off seven Oscars in the
past year, including the best picture trophy for 1951's ``An
American in Paris'' ($15,760), Marlon Brando's best actor prize for
1954's ``On the Waterfront'' ($13,000) and the black and white
interior decoration Oscar for 1941's ``How Green Was My Valley''
($17,715).
   None were sold by the original recipients; heirs or friends who
had later received the trophies put them on the block.
   When Malcolm Willits, the book store's owner, announced that he
would hold a February auction for the 1957 best-picture trophy for
``Around the World in 80 Days,'' the Academy said enough, initiating
a court action that, for now, has blocked any future trophy sales.
   The Academy insists that a contract signed by Oscar winners
mandates that they will not sell the trophies without first offering
them to the Academy for a nominal fee.
   ``But now that the word is out that these awards are worth
$10,000 to $50,000, people are reluctant to sell them back to the
Academy for $10,'' Willits said.
   ``The Academy has created something of great value here. This is
the most famous award in the world _ the most instantly recognizable
award. The Nobel Prize might be a greater honor, but people know
more about what an Academy Award looks like.
   ``And they're very limited, too. There's not too many of them
around. ... Twenty years ago, you wouldn't have a movie poster in
your living room unless you were a college student. Now, you can go
into Beverly Hills homes and there's a movie poster, and the darn
thing's worth $10,000 or $20,000 dollars.''
   When the Academy won a court order temporarily blocking future
auctions, Willits decided to sell his store. ``It seemed to be the
final straw. I don't like lawsuits,'' he said. ``I'm getting older
and I'd like to write movie scripts.''
   Yet the Academy has lost its most recent attempt to save its
trophy's integrity: A copyright infringement suit brought against
the Houston International Film Festival was dismissed March 16 in a
California federal court.
   The Academy had claimed the Lone Star Statuette, designed and
built by Chicago's Creative House Promotions, was ``practically
identical'' to the Oscar. The court found otherwise.



 AP890330-0123 
AP-NR-03-30-89 2032EST
r a AM-Oscar-Perspective     03-30 0417
AM-Oscar-Perspective,0447
61st Oscars: Way Too Much, And Some New Award Categories
By BOB THOMAS
Associated Press Writer
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   Spencer Tracy's acting technique was simply
``less is better,'' and that helped make him the screen's greatest
actor. The Tracy credo is recommended to future producers of
Academy Award shows.
   Wednesday night's orgy of self-congratulation was dazzling,
glamorous and all those familiar Hollywood adjectives. Also too
much.
   Too many endless production numbers. Too much forced
conversation between couples. Too many awards with meaning lost to
the general public.
   The use of ``couples, co-stars, compadres and companions,'' as
presenters for the 61st Academy Awards at the Shrine Auditorium was
clever but wearing.
   The best Oscar shows have been emceed by Will Rogers, Bob Hope,
Johnny Carson and other funnymen who provided continuity as well as
a leavening of pomposity.
   The brightest moments of the 61st Awards came from Billy
Crystal, Robin Williams and Bob Hope, but they were all too brief.
   Tom Selleck remarked that Douglas Fairbanks Sr. handed out the
first awards in 1929 in five minutes. The present awards could be
staged in two hours instead of the 3 hours and 15 minutes they took
Wednesday night on ABC-TV.
   But the show will never be shorter. Reason: The time is needed
to sell all those 30-second adds at $375,000 per.
   Since the Academy Awards are a night of superlatives here are a
few more:
   The most heartfelt acceptance: Dustin Hoffman.
   The most intelligent acceptance: Jodie Foster.
   Warmest reception: Lucille Ball and Bob Hope.
   Best looking legs: Cyd Charisse.
   Second-best looking legs: Martin Short.
   Worst desecration of an icon: Snow White portrayed as a whining
would-be starlet.
   Best comedy routine: Billy Crystal imitating Yul Brynner as Babe
Ruth.
   Best walk-on music: ``The Second Time Around'' for Melanie
Griffith and Don Johnson.
   Least promising rock singer: Rob Lowe.
   Most overworked butt of jokes: Vice President Dan Quayle by
Crystal, Hope and Williams (twice).
   Most prevalent fashion: Strapless gowns.
   Seemingly endless number: ``Oscar Winners of Tomorrow.''
   Most relentless double entendre: Bo Derek and Dudley Moore.
   Most questionable taste: Kurt Russell's ``proposal'' of marriage
to Goldie Hawn.
   Most mentioned agent: Michael Ovitz of Creative Artists Agency.
   Most recurrent dance routine: The Rockettes-like line of kickers.
   Best exchange of banter: Sean Connery, Michael Caine and Roger
Moore.
   Most welcomed elimination: Singing of the nominees for best song.
   Most stunning beauty: Michelle Pfeiffer
   Worst reader of Teleprompter: Walter Matthau.


   Editors: Wednesday's ceremony was Bob Thomas' 45th Academy
Awards.



 AP891110-0043 
AP-NR-11-10-89 0356EST
r a PM-OscarCopyright     11-10 0359
PM-Oscar Copyright,0368
Oscar Trophy Has No Copyright
By JOHN HORN
Associated Press Writer
LOS ANGELES (AP) 

   The Oscar statuette, one of the most
recognizable images in the entertainment world, has no copyright
protection, a federal judge has ruled.
   The small Academy Award statue is part of the public domain,
U.S. District Court Judge Laughlin Waters said in a ruling released
Thursday.
   The decision was a setback for the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences, which had sued a Chicago-based manufacturer of
an employee-incentive trophy similar to the Oscar.
   Academy President Karl Malden said the ruling ``comes as a shock
to me.'' The academy said it would appeal.
   The academy claimed that the Star Award, the trophy look-alike
made by Creative House Promotions, violated copyright laws, diluted
the academy's trademark and represented unfair competition.
   The Star Award depicted a naked, muscular male much like the
Oscar, just two inches shorter and holding a star instead of a
sword. It had a gold finish similar to the Oscar, and stood on a
circular gold cap mounted on a cylindrical base.
   Although Waters acknowledged that the Creative House trophy is
``very similar'' to the Oscar, he rejected all of the academy's
legal claims, saying that the statuette became part of the public
domain prior to Jan. 1, 1978, the effective date of the Copyright
Act of 1976.
   The film industry's top award was distributed from the first
ceremony in 1929 until about 1941 without the ``c'' mark indicating
a copyright.
   The judge ruled, too, that the Oscar not only was an honorary
award but also was used to promote the film industry, and therefore
did not have a ``limited purpose,'' as required by the copyright
act.
   The academy noted that the ruling applied only to the statuette
and that the academy's trademark and service marks for the Oscar
and the Academy Award names and symbols are unaffected.
   ``We are surprised that the court would base its decision on
events which occurred half a century ago, overlooking the
meticulous fashion in which the Academy has protected the integrity
of its institutional symbol for decades,'' Malden said in a
statement.



 AP900220-0065 
AP-NR-02-20-90 1033EST
r a PM-People-SpikeLee     02-20 0218
PM-People-Spike Lee,0223
Director Spike Lee Has Pointed Remarks in Talk at Syracuse
University
SYRACUSE, N.Y. (AP) 

   Spike Lee may have been wearing a
Georgetown University cap and sweatshirt, but he got a far warmer
reception from Syracuse University students than he did from
Academy Award voters.
   In a lecture and question-and-answer session Monday, Lee
shrugged off the academy's icy treatment of his latest movie, ``Do
the Right Thing,'' and blamed it on generational politics.
   The 1989 film, widely hailed by critics, received only two
Academy Award nominations, and isn't being considered for best
picture or best director.
   The academy's membership consists mainly of ``old people,'' the
32-year-old Lee said. He said they were ``a lot more comfortable
with the black chauffeur in `Driving Miss Daisy''' than with the
angry characters in his film.
   ``I still feel we made the best film of the year,'' he said.
Asked if racism might have been involved in the academy
nominations, Lee replied, ``Racism's involved in everything.''
   Despite the cap and sweatshirt, Syracuse students welcomed him
as one of their own.
   ``He's an African-American, one of the first ones to make it (as
a producer and director), and he's addressing the issues and
concerns affecting our community,'' Syracuse senior Deron Harris
said. ``That's why we're so proud of him.''



 LA033089-0190 
 37693 


March 30, 1989, Thursday, Home Edition 




Calendar; Part 6; Page 1; Column 2; Entertainment Desk 




570 words 




SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE . . . ALMOST; 


ACADEMY VOTERS SURVEY THE FIELD, AND SPREAD THE WEALTH 




By JACK MATHEWS, Times Staff Writer 




Well, it did turn out to be "Rain Man's" evening, but not until the last few 
minutes, and if there was a message in Wednesday night's Academy Awards 
results, it's that parity has returned to Hollywood. 


For two-thirds of the show, the academy voters seemed determined to give an 
award to every film nominated. As it was, 10 different movies split 17 awards, 
the most winners for one year in this decade. 


The major awards made the forecasters look smart and the academy predictable. 
"Rain Man" did win the grand prize (and three other big ones) and "Mississippi 
Burning," with just one Oscar for cinematography, did get punished for its 
highly publicized historical muddling. 


But gone, for a refreshing change, was the slate voting that has turned many 
recent Academy Awards shows into one-note evenings that kept some deserving 
people out of the Oscar resale market. 


"Rain Man," its director Barry Levinson, Hoffman and the screenwriters (the two 
of several who worked on it) may have fulfilled their roles as favorites, but 
there were no sure things elsewhere, and people looking for early patterns had 
to throw away the form. 


The final score shows "Rain Man" with four Oscars and "Dangerous Liaisons" and 
"Who Framed Roger Rabbit" with three each. But there were seven other films 
with one award each. 


Whether the spread represents a change in voting habits, or an absence of a 
film to rally around, it made for a great show and in some cases, the awards 
helped right some wrongs in the nominations process. 


That "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" won three of the six awards for which it was 
nominated may save the academy some embarrassment for neglecting the one 1988 
film sure to be regarded as a classic. 


The good news for observers of voter psychology were the awards given to films 
that were not box-office hits. The voters tend to favor those films that are 
both of substance and commercially successful (thus: "Rain Man"), and whether 
they even bother to see the other nominees is often questioned. 


This year, several winners came from films that failed to ring up big numbers 
at the box office: Jodie Foster as best actress from "The Accused," Geena Davis 
as best supporting actress from "The Accidental Tourist." 


More surprising were the awards given to "Bird" and "The Milagro Beanfield 
War," films that divided critics and sent moviegoers off to the video store 
looking for alternatives. 


Both films were flawed, but the sound editing done for "Bird," which seamlessly 
blended old jazz recordings with fresh studio cuts done by contemporary 
musicians, was brilliant and deserved the award its four-man sound team won. 


David Grusin's Oscar for scoring "The Milagro Beanfield War" overcame even 
bigger odds, winning over popular John Williams' score for "The Accidental 
Tourist." 


The selective mood of the voters is a reflection of the kind of year the film 
industry had, and whether the spread is a quirk, one can hope it suggests a 
trend. 


The 1988 slate of films was, on total, a marked improvement over recent years. 
The industry is still adjusting to its changing -- its older and more demanding 
audience -- and that means a wider variety of films. Nominees this year 
represented as wide a range of material as any in years, and they produced more 
winning films. 


The events last night played hell with the office pool, but it made for a 
better show. Maybe it's the start of something new. 




Photo, Barry Levinson, a triumph for "Rain Man." RANDY LEFFINGWELL / Los 
Angeles Times; Photo, Geena Davis takes an Oscar home for performance in "The 
Accidental Tourist." ; Photo, Kevin Kline holds his Oscar for best-supporting 
actor. JAYNE KAMIN-ONCEA / Los Angeles Times 




ACADEMY AWARDS; 1988 (YEAR); MOTION PICTURES; HONORS; RAIN MAN (MOTION 
PICTURE); HOFFMAN, DUSTIN; FOSTER, JODIE; LEVINSON, BARRY; KLINE, KEVIN; DAVIS, 
GEENA; AWARDS 




 LA033189-0114 
 38062 


March 31, 1989, Friday, Home Edition 




Metro; Part 2; Page 1; Column 3; Metro Desk 




553 words 




DISNEY SUES OVER USE OF SNOW WHITE AT OSCARS 




By NINA J. EASTON, Times Staff Writer 




Who would have thought that Snow White, of all people, would become the source 
of Oscar night's only major glitch? 


The Walt Disney Co. filed suit in Los Angeles federal court Thursday against 
the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, charging copyright 
infringement of its Snow White character and unfair competition. 


The famous fairy tale character, portrayed by singer-dancer Eileen Bowman, 
opened Wednesday night's Academy Awards ceremonies with an elaborate, 10-minute 
song-and-dance routine. But Disney contends that the character was used on the 
show without the company's permission. 


"We have great respect for the academy and for all that it does," Frank Wells, 
Disney's president and chief operating officer, said Thursday in a prepared 
statement. "We were therefore greatly surprised and dismayed when we viewed 
last evening's Academy Awards ceremonies to see that our Snow White character 
had been used extensively without our permission." 


Wells said the suit was filed only after the company asked the academy to 
publicly apologize for its unauthorized use of the character, which debuted in 
a 1937 full-length cartoon film. 


"If such a statement had been agreed to by the academy," Wells said, "we would 
have considered the matter ended. For its own reasons, however, the academy 
unfortunately did not accede to our request." 


Disney spokesman Erwin Okun did not provide any details of Thursday's 
negotiations with academy officials over an apology, except to say that the 
academy's offer "was not to our satisfaction." 


Bruce Davis, the academy's executive administrator, declined comment, saying 
top officials needed time to assess the suit. 


"We haven't gotten any official notification of this," Davis said, adding that 
he learned of the legal action from a reporter. 


Ironically, the academy is extremely protective of the Oscar name and statuette 
copyrights and is quick to object to the image's unauthorized use. 




Number Kept Secret 


Alan Carr, who produced the Oscar show, had ordered that the details of the 
opening number be kept secret until Wednesday night's ABC telecast. 


But in its suit, Disney says a company representative learned of the plans 
early in the week. The company claims that the academy refused to respond to 
its inquiries until Wednesday afternoon. 


At that point, the Disney statement said, the academy, "through a legal 
representative, denied to Disney that the Academy Award program contained any 
material deleterious to the interests of Disney, without revealing the 
academy's intention to feature Disney's Snow White." 


Carr could not be reached for comment Thursday. 


The Snow White character -- as portrayed Wednesday night by Bowman -- was 
created by Steve Silver, who for 15 years has used the character in the San 
Francisco musical revue "Beach Blanket Babylon." 


Disney files dozens of suits a year against individuals and companies that copy 
its characters, particularly in consumer products. 


"We sue all the time," Okun said. 


But Okun said the company, which won four Oscars Wednesday night, has never 
sued Silver over his use of the Snow White character in that production. The 
spokesman, however, did not preclude the possibility of a future lawsuit. 


"We look at these characters as the heart and soul of the company," Okun 
explained. 




Photo, Eileen Bowman, portraying Snow White, works crowd, below,. . . ; Photo, 
. . . and dances with Rob Lowe in Academy Awards' opening. RANDY LEFFINGWELL / 
Los Angeles Times 




SNOW WHITE; CARR, ALAN; BOWMAN, EILEEN; WALT DISNEY CO; ACADEMY OF MOTION 
PICTURE ARTS AND SCIENCES; ACADEMY AWARDS; SUITS; COPYRIGHT; CARTOON CHARACTERS 




 AP880911-0016 
AP-NR-09-11-88 0423EDT
r i BC-HurricaneGilbert     09-11 0339
BC-Hurricane Gilbert,0348
Hurricane Gilbert Heads Toward Dominican Coast
By RUDDY GONZALEZ
Associated Press Writer
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) 

   Hurricane Gilbert swept
toward the Dominican Republic Sunday, and the Civil Defense alerted
its heavily populated south coast to prepare for high winds, heavy
rains and high seas.
   The storm was approaching from the southeast with sustained
winds of 75 mph gusting to 92 mph.
   ``There is no need for alarm,'' Civil Defense Director Eugenio
Cabral said in a television alert shortly before midnight Saturday.
   Cabral said residents of the province of Barahona should closely
follow Gilbert's movement. An estimated 100,000 people live in the
province, including 70,000 in the city of Barahona, about 125 miles
west of Santo Domingo.
   Tropical Storm Gilbert formed in the eastern Caribbean and
strengthened into a hurricane Saturday night. The National
Hurricane Center in Miami reported its position at 2 a.m. Sunday at
latitude 16.1 north, longitude 67.5 west, about 140 miles south of
Ponce, Puerto Rico, and 200 miles southeast of Santo Domingo.
   The National Weather Service in San Juan, Puerto Rico, said
Gilbert was moving westward at 15 mph with a ``broad area of
cloudiness and heavy weather'' rotating around the center of the
storm.
   The weather service issued a flash flood watch for Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands until at least 6 p.m. Sunday.
   Strong winds associated with the Gilbert brought coastal
flooding, strong southeast winds and up to 12 feet feet to Puerto
Rico's south coast. There were no reports of casualties.
   San Juan, on the north coast, had heavy rains and gusts
Saturday, but they subsided during the night.
   On Saturday, Hurricane Florence was downgraded to a tropical
storm and its remnants pushed inland from the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Residents returned home, happy to find little damage from 80 mph
winds and sheets of rain.
   Florence, the sixth named storm of the 1988 Atlantic storm
season, was the second hurricane. The first, Debby, reached minimal
hurricane strength briefly before hitting the Mexican coast last
month.



 AP880914-0004 
AP-NR-09-14-88 0001EDT
u i AM-HurricaneGilbert 4thLd-Writethru a0839 09-14 1054
AM-Hurricane Gilbert, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0839,1082
Killer Hurricane Roars Toward Mexico With 175 mph Winds
Eds: LEADS with 15 grafs to UPDATE with report from Jamaica of six
dead, 60,000 homeless; storm midnight advisory. PICKS up 14th pvs
`The center said ...' SUBS 20th pvs `Gene Graves ...' with 1 graf
to CORRECT that helicopters working to evacuate 10,000 in gulf.
By The Associated Press

   Gilbert, an ``extremely dangerous hurricane'' and one of the
strongest storms in history, roared toward Mexico's Yucatan
Peninsula Tuesday with 175 mph winds after battering the Dominican
Republic, Jamaica and the tiny Cayman Islands.
   The hurricane killed at least five people Sunday in the
Dominican Republic, civil defense officials said. Six people died
and 60,000 were left homeless in Jamaica on Monday, officials there
said.
   Prime Minister Edward Seaga said the hurricane swept the full
length of Jamaica, ``leaving a trail of wreckage behind it.''
   ``It will take us some time before we can assess the full damage
without any doubt,'' Seaga said in a statement. ``But I have no
doubt that this going to be the worst disaster that we have
experienced in our modern history.''
   Communications were down with many storm-ravaged areas and the
death toll was expected to rise with the arrival of damage and
casualty reports.
   The hurricane, traveling westward across the Caribbean Sea, was
upgraded Tuesday to a Category 5, the strongest and deadliest type
of hurricane. Such storms have maximum sustained winds greater than
155 mph and can cause catastrophic damage.
   Bob Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center in Coral
Gables, Fla., described Gilbert as ``a great hurricane ... in the
top 10 percent (historically) as far as intensity, size and
destructive potential.''
   Only two Category 5 hurricanes have hit the United States _ a
1935 storm that killed 408 people in Florida, and Hurricane
Camille, which devastated the Mississippi coast in 1969 and killed
256 people.
   ``The people who need to be concerned now are those people over
on the Yucatan Peninsula _ Cancun, Cozumel, that whole area,''
Sheets said.
   Mexico's news media reported beachfront hotels were evacuated in
the Yucatan resorts of Cancun and Cozumel Island.
   They gave no figures on the numer of evacuees, but said people
in Cancun were being sent from the hotel zone into the city center,
about 6 miles away.
   Cozumel is south of Cancun and the reports said hotel guests
also were being moved to more secure areas away from the shoreline.
   Mexican officials expected the storm to hit in the early morning
hours Wednesday.
   At midnight EDT the U.S. National Weather Service said Gilbert
was centered near latitude 19.9 north, longitude 84.8 west, or
about 150 miles east-southeast of Cozumel.
   It said Gilbert was moving west-northwest at about 15 mph with
maximum sustained winds of 175 mph. The center said tropical
storm-force winds extend outward up to 250 miles to the north and
200 miles to the south of the center.
   ``People in the warned areas should have completed all possible
preparations for this extremely dangerous hurricane,'' it said.
   The center said Hurricane Gilbert was the most intense storm on
record in terms of barometric pressure. It said by 8 p.m. EDT it
was measured at 26.13 inches, breaking the 26.35 inches recorded
for the 1935 hurricane that devastated the Florida Keys.
   ``That's the lowest pressure ever measured in the Western
Hemisphere,'' said forecaster Mark Zimmer.
   ``There is very serious flooding'' in the Cayman Islands, Erina
Nichols, a tourism official in Miami, said Tuesday after speaking
with residents of the islands. ``The Run Point (community) is
taking a real beating.''
   The storm later knocked out all telephone service to the Cayman
Islands, a British dependency of 23,000 people that was expecting
12-foot tides.
   Warren Chase, an amateur radio operator in Fort Myers, Fla.,
said he received a report of sailboat with seven people aboard
missing near the Cayman Islands.
   Oil companies evacuated thousands of workers from rigs in the
Gulf of Mexico, according to reports from New Orleans.
   Gene Graves, marketing director for Petroleum Helicopters Inc.
in Lafayette, La., said his company's 18 helipads were working at
full capacity to evacuate about 10,000 oil rigs in the Gulf of
Mexico.
   The Cuban news agency Prensa Latina said 40,000 people, many of
them foreign vacationers and students, were evacuated Tuesday from
the Isle of Youth off the southwestern coast as the hurricane
passed 200 miles to the south.
   In New York City, a ham radio operator who was monitoring
amateur radio communications in Jamaica said Tuesday, ``Kingston is
devastated, Montego Bay is hit hard and Ocho Rios is flooded.
   The operator, Norm Chwat, an officer with the American Red Cross
Radio Club, said therth coast had been wrecked by the
hurricane.
   Herb Schoenbaum, a radio ham operator in the Virgin Islands,
said he spoke Tuesday with Dave Porter, an American staying in the
Wyndham Hotel on Jamaica's Montego Bay. ``Porter reported that the
hotel `peeled apart like a banana' when the force of Hurricane
Gilbert hit last night,'' Schoenbaum said.
   ``This morning he says there is just nothing left. Boats that
were on the beach, the little rental Sailfishes or Sunfishes, were
driven into cars like spears _ power lines down, almost every tree
in the area is on the ground.''
   Schoenbaum said Porter told him people who were trying to enter
the hotel on their hands and knees at the height of the storm were
swept into the ocean.
   Glenn Baxter of Belgrade Lakes, Me., said he spoke with a ham
operator in Jamaica who told him the roof of a hospital in
Mandeville ripped off ``and the hospital has caved in. And that is
the worst horror show that I've heard about because that would
imply that a lot of people could have been hurt.''
   The Jamaican consulate in Miami said today it had n immediate
information on the extent of damages or casualties.
   Jamaica was still out of contact with the rest of the world by
telephone.
   Roger Myers, southern regional spokesman for the Federal
Aviation Administration in Atlanta, said both international
airports in Jamaica are closed. ``We've been told the government
has asked commercial radio stations to remain silent so Radio
Jamaica can broadcast information,'' Myers said.



 AP880914-0027 
AP-NR-09-14-88 0239EDT
r a PM-HurricaneFacts     09-14 0488
PM-Hurricane Facts,0499
Gilbert: Third Force 5 Hurricane This Century
By MICHAEL WARREN
Associated Press Writer
MIAMI (AP) 

   With the winds of Hurricane Gilbert clocked at 175
miles per hour, U.S. weather officials called Gilbert the most
intense hurricane ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere.
   Mark Zimmer, a meterologist at the National Hurricane Center,
reported an Air Force reconnaissance plane measured the barometric
pressure at Gilbert's center at 26.13 inches at 5:52 p.m. EDT on
Tuesday. Gilbert was barreling toward Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula.
   ``That's the lowest pressure ever measured in the Western
Hemisphere,'' Zimmer said. The previous record low pressure of
26.35 inches was set by the 1935 Labor Day hurricane that struck
the Florida Keys with winds above 150 mph, killing 408 people, he
said.
   With tropical storm force winds extending 250 miles north and
200 miles south of the hurricane's center, Gilbert also was one of
the largest. But because the circumference of a hurricane changes
so often during its course, no records are kept on their overall
size, said center meterologist Jesse Moore.
   Hurricane Debby, which barely crossed the 74 mph threshold to
hurricane strength before striking Mexico last month, was probably
about half that size, Moore said.
   Gilbert is one of only three Category 5 storms in the hemisphere
since weather officials began keeping detailed records. The others
were the 1935 Labor Day hurricane and Hurricane Camille, which
bulldozed the Mississippi Coast with 172 mph winds and a 28-foot
wave in 1969, leaving $1.4 billion in damage and 256 dead.
   A 1900 hurricane is responsible for the worst natural disaster
in U.S. history, however. That storm hit Galveston, Texas, Sept. 8
and killed more than 6,000 people.
   Category 5 storms have winds greater than 155 mph, barometric
pressure of less than 27.17 inches and a storm surge higher than 18
feet.
   The storm surge _ a great dome of water that follows the eye of
the hurricane across coastlines, bulldozing everything in its path
_ accounts for nine out of 10 hurricane fatalities.
   Camille's storm surge was 25 feet high, but the hurricane center
was forecasting a surge of only 8-12 feet for Gilbert, Zimmer said.
   The damage from these worst-case hurricanes is catastrophic _
shrubs and trees blown down, all street signs gone, roofs and
windows blown away and shattered, and mobile homes destroyed.
   ``Moisture and heat are what drives the hurricane,'' Zimmer
said. ``The engine itself is this tall chimney of warm, moist air
in the center. If the atmospheric conditions in general allow this
warm chimney to build to very high levels, 10-12 miles high, then
you can have a severe hurricane.''
   Category 4 storms cause extreme damage with winds from 131 to
155 mph, surge of 13-18 feet and pressure of 27.17 to 27.90. The
weakest hurricanes, Category 1, cause minimal damage with winds of
74 to 95 mph, 4-5 foot surge and pressure at 28.94 or more.


